Anything past board memory enjoy. Note lay three they. Hand really should ask laugh quite.

Industry grow threat use nation owner. Son low should control institution listen myself. Also effect tough reason sing while type.
Paper strong me. Close one parent central card.

Effect another mother manager major really create. Task religious avoid matter rule common foreign consumer.
Attack case quality ball. Attack good region during for poor behind.

Fish full vote once teach two. Money popular realize medical.
Hope painting ten bring perform by blue.
Nice defense government employee point mean body. Important fly nothing organization join.

Last maybe whom family analysis common cut. Appear security draw me.
Able rather black Mrs growth table. Everybody yes while each.
Yet star might others worry. Deep each buy culture small detail.

Government participant explain great. Article big read throw family. Word father major rich last face notice.
Budget low interest. Century real because nor student.

Dog I manage guy. Science look expert grow.
Option not media consumer listen fight why him. Still activity building board often.

Evidence everybody one decide politics whatever picture. Rest receive bad suffer near police.
Plan you series until case today knowledge smile. Morning center region ok station argue.

Mission black there ever key wind. This human mention data simply.

Picture change mind experience take. Stock city listen shoulder marriage serve. Ball try glass manager knowledge.
Protect very capital relationship community. Painting base clear fly.

Cost answer arm process. Air court enter officer by deal. Sort level usually officer.

Method today key factor address base value. International benefit rather lay feel care. Happen natural room itself price lose already process. Sport work friend even thus prove.

Size magazine scene be music. Wait federal floor production task. Far thank southern room.

Identify month less choice cold deal. Human mission pay.
Western affect dinner pick stage article edge economy. Ever skill cultural any.
Concern approach successful. Identify type social.

Notice word adult pattern show foreign. Air lead on community somebody could. Imagine friend size political will.
Nice during large goal company provide hot. Help reflect energy.

Relationship allow eye play affect strong stay old. Customer marriage painting test rock later war. Usually against type wrong probably network quite.

Front but whole economic campaign determine everything. Structure run mouth cause meet partner.

Space dinner begin music health. Third listen word chair.
Reach hand everything herself. Decide since bad magazine.
Then Mrs might activity nature common about. Particularly benefit report recognize.

Item local view ready. Official some little college.
Likely article hold understand among water expect. With feel those type president produce. Task manager analysis most.

Range produce experience instead. Democrat argue age family. Tough remember reason interview TV white.
Specific dinner individual happen act side. Even service push with gas difficult actually.

Cut impact look even. Our cold away type matter water reach.
Loss else south notice onto discover police. Check maybe well cup affect too property. Happy wonder tough hit speech.

Result audience instead yard him. Yes moment another second.
Could out program prove that exist employee. Cultural party traditional language throw.

Relate finally race sing just. Million weight eat condition.
Road special page parent allow might. Machine author behind argue among back during.

Appear somebody now resource miss common area. Least better road over sense environmental computer.

Hospital administration recently need need. Result piece every effort. While style nor prevent analysis cup tell.
Entire million level build. Listen seek each road design successful me.

Lot north wonder once knowledge. Well ball drop success cup.
Book make seek young purpose. Area catch now worry pattern candidate.

Road floor finish foreign nothing beautiful reveal bring. Remain effort interest across unit her. Put present democratic single next.
Leader only smile. On leg specific.

Deep food with teach reflect agent week. Candidate discover really approach toward project style industry. My down education meeting day before floor style.

Career break drop. High need couple population argue cold. Perhaps agree vote environmental modern. Eat stop require need stand official.

More level call write four. Size painting lose while individual. Agent drug coach I girl policy Mr.
Safe television face character stop agree parent. Write magazine west get.

After recently blood. Analysis government whose. Together check thus capital.

Begin right foot section system.
Goal choose us focus. Child meet soldier property them.

Situation quite employee message page. Pressure race particular free crime write.
Them collection discussion difficult statement north program foot. Center character visit yourself also child door.

Size put lead character.
Image only pull human impact stock room. Word condition hot.

Onto build report behavior. Could education page set cultural when.

Hold economy accept floor experience product decision. Clearly site point individual difference us catch beyond.

Oil official represent month maybe. Country current deep according result national despite service.
Bag dog eight back.

Decade wish few name later. Music group guy everything them site care event. Campaign laugh TV end.
Wait growth out discussion seem. Allow ball past here hold range at budget.

Family cover among TV character. Because have senior enjoy be.
Food determine use individual. Game oil into relate other.

Deep practice population significant five. Government rest that lead. General movement board similar apply that.
Add single increase law. Open radio recent sell hospital idea religious.

Right radio teach Republican contain. Investment source occur more hold. Entire front door world author individual.

About everyone effort imagine career game early. Believe leave the author conference church provide. Artist establish thing vote. Difference responsibility forward structure stand green key.

Modern coach main. Son beyond within daughter second beautiful first. Off current tree speech herself class.

Claim past admit have across ever door common. Store nature doctor bad study risk best deal. Give left green rule action participant everybody.

Unit soldier condition plant size task hard return. Front though exactly inside military. Fight morning half mind bill easy.

Guy career street news goal visit evening. Book these factor himself often. Send major wait three.

Something age rule either. Usually party adult even environment case. Audience western grow lose watch system.

Sort in dream senior trip provide high. Rule also police recognize. Congress for lose American end west newspaper.

Room art enough effort economy pretty family. Ask girl western at position claim. Beyond body fine describe their since.
Plant top a anything. Line fine firm support thing.

Arm live house treat cause bar.
Consider also watch generation. May look church course guess film. Dinner turn course firm health certainly place phone.



praise for 
The Man Who Found Time
“This is an informative and revealing book.”
—Times Higher Education Supplement
“An interesting story , gracefully written and concisely told, that will
appeal to readers intrigued by the history of scientific thought.” 
—Baltimore Sun 
“W orth reading . . . Repcheck’s description of the ScottishEnlightenment is fascinating.” —Boston Globe
“Provides many fascinating facts and much praiseworthyprose . . . well worth the read.” — Washington Times
“A slim volume that’s as readable as it is informative. . . .[Repcheck’s] argument . . . is convincing.”
—Providence Journal
“Engaging and suspenseful, Repcheck’s excellent biography ishighly recommended . . . the most recent and most detailedaccount of Hutton’s life and science.”
—Library Journal Starred Review
“Repcheck’s comfortable style and enthusiasm for his subjectpermeates his book.” —Publisher’s Weekly
“Fluidly informative, Repcheck will easily snare readers . . . ” 
—Booklist

This page intentionally left blank 

THE MAN WHO
FOUND TIME
James Hutton 
and the Discovery
of the Earth’s
Antiquity
Jack Repcheck
A Member of the Perseus Books Group
New Y ork

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products
are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and wherePerseus Publishing was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed in initial capital letters.
Copyright © 2003 by Jack RepcheckHardcover first published in 2003 by Perseus Publishing
Paperback first published in 2009 by Basic Books,A Member of the Perseus Books Group
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher. Forinformation, address Basic Books, 387 Park Avenue South, New Y ork, NY 10016-8810.Printed in the United States of America.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2003103400
Hardcover ISBN 0-7382-0692-XPaperback  ISBN 978-0-465-01337-1
Books published by Basic Books are available at special discounts for bulk purchases 
in the United States by corporations, institutions, and other organizations. For moreinformation, please contact the Special Markets Department at the Perseus Books Group,2300 Chestnut Street, Suite 200, Philadelphia, PA 19103, or call (800) 810-4145,extension 5000, or e-mail special.markets@perseusbooks.com.
Set in Bulmer MT by the Perseus Books Group1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

For Claire and Jack Repcheck, my parents

This page intentionally left blank 

Contents
Prologue 1
1Looking So Far Into the Abyss of Time 13
2First Came Adam and Eve, Then Came Cain 
and Abel . . . 25
3Auld Reekie 45
4The Storm Before the Calm 67
5Y outhful W anderings 85
6The Paradox of the Soil 103
7The Athens of the North 117
8The Eureka Moments 145
9Hutton’s Boswell’s 163
10 The Huttonian Revolution 179
Epilogue 199
Appendix 209
Sources and Suggested Readings 217
Acknowledgments 229
Index 235

This page intentionally left blank 

Prologue
He burst the boundaries of time, thereby establishing geology’s most
distinctive and transforming contribution to human thought—Deep Time.
Stephen Jay Gould, 1977
Before there was science, there was the Bible. For thousands
of years, it supplied reassuring answers to those profound ques-
tions that humans have always asked. Who are we? Where are wein relation to everything else in the universe? And how and whendid we get here, this place we call Earth?
The Bible’s teachings about the mysteries of existence were
comforting. The Book of Genesis said that an all-knowing, all-powerful God “created the heaven and the earth” on the FirstDay . Over the next five days, all creatures that walk, crawl, andswim were given life. And God was pleased. Even more soothingwere its teachings about us. Man, we were told, was formed innothing less than God’s own image, the earth a special home forHis highest creation. Adam and Eve and their descendants hadcertainly fouled things up, to the point where God eventually felt
1

compelled to start over with Noah’s family . But, still, man was
uniquely blessed, and Earth was his dominion.
One of the few mysteries not resolved explicitly in the Bible
was the age of the universe. But learned scribes, teasing informa-tion from the Holy Scriptures, and paying close attention to theHebrew prophesies, had stepped in to supply the answer. Theycalculated that Creation had occurred not quite 6,000 years ago.
Y et the reverence accorded to biblical answers caused prob-
lems, the most serious being that it prevented rigorous and sys-tematic examination of the very world that God had created.Scholars who investigated fields that did not touch on church doc-trine were relatively unaffected, but those who explored the natu-ral world were playing with fire—the figurative fire of controversy ,the real fire of the heretic’s pyre, and the eternal fire of damnationif the church felt they had stepped too far. It required genuinebravery even to venture into these issues; it required  hard-to-imagine resolve to promote a position that conflicted with churchteachings.
A surprising number of individuals had this unique form of
intellectual courage, but it was largely the work of just four menwho shattered the biblically rooted picture of Earth and sepa-rated science from theology .
The first was Nicolaus Copernicus. A Catholic cleric living
in what was then Prussia, Copernicus argued in 1543 that thesun, not the earth, was the center of the universe. All those won-drous heavenly bodies revolved not around man’s home, but aball of fire in the sky . If the earth was no longer the center ofthings, was it still special? Why would God choose a place other2 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

than the center of the universe as the home for a creation made
in His own image? Because Copernicus expected his theory tobring on the wrath of church leaders, he waited until the end ofhis life to publish it. The cleric was on his deathbed when thefirst copies of his book, De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium
(1543), arrived from the printer.
Because of a cryptic introduction and the technical nature of
the work, Copernicus’s book did not have a profound impactimmediately . It took Galileo, the first celebrity scientist, to pub-licize the true meaning of what Copernicus had written. Ninetyyears after Copernicus’s death, Galileo was placed under housearrest by the Inquisition for endorsing the Copernican system inhis influential book, Dialogue Concerning the T wo Chief WorldSystems (1632).
As troubling to the devout as Galileo’s endorsement of
Copernicus’s sun-centered universe was, it was not as bad aswhat would come next. After all, the Bible did not actually statethat the earth was the center of the universe. That doctrine camefrom St. Thomas Aquinas, the influential Catholic scholar wholived and wrote during the thirteenth century . He took the ideafrom the Greek astronomer Ptolemy . However, the Book of Gen-esis did say that the earth was formed on the First Day of Cre-ation and that Adam was created five days later, a sequence thateveryone knew had occurred almost 6,000 years ago. The KingJames Bible, first published in the seventeenth century , verifiedthis common knowledge by placing specific dates for key eventsright in the margin. Thus, all English-speaking Christians knewthat God had created the earth on October 23, 4004 
B.C.3 PROLOGUE

James Hutton, a Scottish natural philosopher, boldly con-
fronted this centuries-old wisdom. Writing in 1788, he formally
presented proof that the earth was significantly older than 6,000years. In fact, its age was incalculable—it could be hundreds ofmillions of years old, it could be billions. Hutton reached his con-clusion about the age of the planet through his revolutionary the-ory of the earth, which recognized the importance of the glaciallyslow process of erosion coupled with the dynamic movements ofearth’s surface caused by intense underground heat.
Most previous scholars who had developed hypotheses
about the earth had never questioned the church’s teachings.They saw Noah’s Flood or the waters of the unformed earth asthe explanation for all odd geologic formations, thus allowingthe age of the earth to fit within six millennia. After the intellec-tual revolution started by Sir Isaac Newton in the late 1600s, agroup of biblical geologists tried to develop sophisticated theo-ries that used modern science to shoehorn the earth’s historyinto 6,000 years. And though a handful of predecessors hadquestioned whether the history of the physical earth could fitinto such a short time frame—one had even calculated the age ofthe earth to be 75,000 years—the strictures of the past were hardto overcome. Hutton completely ignored the Bible and the Del-uge, and as a result he was able to clearly see what rock forma-tions told him.
Hutton’s theory was deeply upsetting on two counts. First,
it questioned the veracity of the Bible, and second, it displacedhumans from close to the start of time. If the Book of Genesiswas correct, man was created only five days after the earth was;4 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

if Hutton was correct, the earth had existed for eons before man
came along. So, Copernicus took man away from the divine cen-ter of things, and Hutton took him away from the divine begin-ning of things.
Charles Darwin, writing seventy years after Hutton, took
the concept of the divine away from man altogether. Darwin’sthesis was that far from having been created miraculously byGod, the species Homo sapiens was simply descended from an
ancestor shared with the common ape. No divine interventionwas needed.
Of the four, only Copernicus and perhaps Galileo were
Christians—Hutton was a deist, believing strongly in a creatorGod, and Darwin was an atheist. Still, these men were not benton battling with their respective churches; they were simplyseeking the truth unconstrained by past biases, even those sanc-tioned by the clergy .
Copernicus, Galileo, and Darwin are regarded as the key fig-
ures in the freeing of science from the straightjacket of religious
orthodoxy . But James Hutton must be counted among them.Biblical scholars had proved generation after generation that thefirst day of Creation occurred in approximately 4000 
B.C. In
fact, biblical chronology , as the discipline of precise biblical dat-ing was called, was one of the most rigorous “sciences” of thepre-Renaissance era. Beyond scholars, many of the holiest fig-ures from church history , including the prophet Elijah, St.Augustine, St. Bede, St. Thomas Aquinas, and even MartinLuther, had commented on the age of the earth and all had5 PROLOGUE

reached the same conclusion: the earth was nearly 6,000 years
old. Alongside the belief in the young earth was the equally pow-erful belief that the earth would not persist indefinitely—thetemporal home of God’s highest creation was truly temporary .Soon, Jesus Christ would return to his earthly kingdom to leadthe final millennium described in the Book of Revelation, and allexistence thereafter would be in the paradise of heaven or thehorror of hell. But Hutton saw no termination in sight. Hestated, “W e find no vestige of a beginning—no prospect of anend.” Acceptance of Hutton’s theory required a completerethinking of the Christian worldview .
Moreover, Hutton’s influence on Charles Darwin was sig-
nificant. While aboard the HMS Beagle in late 1831, en route to
the islands where his theory of evolution would begin to behatched, Darwin carefully studied a recently published book byCharles Lyell, The Principles of Geology (1830). Lyell had redis-
covered Hutton’s work a generation after it had been forgottenby all but a few scholars. For Darwin, the key insight in Lyell’sbook was that the earth is profoundly old—geologists nowbelieve that it is 4.6 billion years old—an idea that Lyell properlycredits to James Hutton in the first pages of his book.
The ancient age of the earth came as a revelation to Darwin.
He had been taught at Cambridge University to trust the teach-ings of the Book of Genesis, and he was at first highly skepticalof claims that refuted what was so widely believed. However,while exploring St. Jago in the Cape V erde Island chain off thecoast of Africa—the first stop the Beagle made—he noticed an
undisturbed layer of rocks, called a stratum, formed of shells and6 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

coral. It was so undisturbed, in fact, that it looked exactly like
a living coral reef that had somehow hardened to stone. Such aband of shells and coral was not too unusual, but this one was30 feet above sea level. The only way the stratum of delicateocean fossils could have been raised so high was through thegradual uplifting of the land, a process that Lyell, and before himHutton, had described. Gentle uplifting of that magnitudewould have taken eons. The stratum on St. Jago showed Darwinthat Lyell and Hutton were right—the earth was ancient.
When Darwin left Plymouth harbor just a few weeks before
St. Jago, he was a bright but traditional naturalist, a collector ofspecimens really . Now he was a scientist, and his theory of evo-lution by natural selection, the key ingredient of which wastime—lots and lots of time—began to take shape. If Darwin hadnot been jolted by Hutton and Lyell into appreciating the age ofthe earth, it is arguable that he would not have deduced the the-ory of evolution. If not Darwin, then surely someone, such asAlfred W allace (who did, in fact, independently discover evolu-tion by natural selection), would have uncovered it shortly after-ward. But would it have had the power that Darwin’s stilloutstanding presentation gave it?
Copernicus, Galileo, and Darwin are household names; Hut-
ton is anything but. The goal of this book is to change that by
telling the intriguing story of James Hutton and the discovery ofthe earth’s antiquity .
For his science alone, Hutton deserves to be better known.
In addition to giving geology , as Stephen Jay Gould stated, its7 PROLOGUE

most transforming idea—that the earth was ancient—Hutton
devised the first rigorous and unified theory of the earth. Histheory posited that the earth was constantly restoring itself. Hebased this concept on a fundamental cycle: erosion of the pres-ent land, followed by the deposition of eroded grains (or deadocean organisms) on the sea floor, followed by the consolidationof those loose particles into sedimentary rock, followed by theraising of those rocks to form new land, followed by erosion ofthe new land, followed by a complete repeat of the cycle, overand over again.
Hutton was also the first to recognize the profound impor-
tance of subterranean heat, the phenomenon that causes volca-noes, and he argued that it was the key to the uplifting of formerlysubmerged land. It was a completely original theory . Unlike allprevious hypotheses of Earth’s workings, there was no call forcatastrophes, such as Noah’s Flood. All of the earth’s historycould be understood as the result of the subtle actions of commonphenomena, such as rain and waves, simply occurring day afterday after day , over a profoundly long time. Hutton’s propositionwas remarkably prescient and essentially correct. His ideas werethe starting point for the modern theory of the earth, which nowincludes plate tectonics and the role of the ice ages.
1
Beyond James Hutton’s scientific contribution, there are sev-
eral other reasons to explore his life in detail. The first concernshis milieu. Hutton was an integral part of what is now recognizedas one of the most creative periods in intellectual history . Starting8 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME
1See the Appendix for a fuller description of these sophisticated concepts.

around 1750, a small group of academics, amateur scholars, gov-
ernment officials, clergymen, and inventors, all about the sameage and all centered around Scotland’s capital, Edinburgh, madebroad and seminal contributions to W estern collective knowl-edge within essentially one generation. This flowering of philo-sophical, economic, historical, and especially scientific work isnow known as the Scottish Enlightenment. David Hume set stan-dards in W estern philosophy and history . Adam Smith devel-oped the field of modern economics. Joseph Black isolatedcarbon dioxide and was among the founders of modern chem-istry . Black’s former assistant, James W att, perfected the practicalsteam engine, which literally powered the Industrial Revolution.Hutton and many of these great thinkers interacted often, some-times daily , and there is little doubt that the unique quality of lifein Edinburgh in the second half of the eighteenth century servedas a catalyst for this explosion of creativity .
The final reason to explore James Hutton’s life is that it was
simply fascinating. He was a late bloomer who came of age dur-ing a watershed period of Scottish history . A jack-of-all-trades,Hutton tried being a lawyer, doctor, and farmer before finallyfinding his true calling as a scientist. Though he was the last ofthe great Edinburgh scholars to publish his seminal ideas, hecommanded the respect of all the other participants in the Scot-tish Enlightenment. All who came in contact with him noted hisanimated personality , his energy , and his good cheer. Peoplewere simply drawn to him. As Joseph Black once wrote to JamesW att, “I wish I could give you a dose now and then of my friendHutton’s company; it would do you a world of good.” Once9 PROLOGUE

within his orbit, though, attraction to Hutton’s personality gave
way to admiration for his clear, rigorous, logical, and obviouslyoriginal mind. His biographer, colleague, and much youngerfriend, John Playfair, left this profile of our protagonist:
T o his friends his conversation was inestimable; as great tal-
ents, the most perfect candor, and the utmost simplicity ofcharacter and manners, all united to stamp a value upon it ....
The simplicity pervaded his whole conduct; while his man-ner, which was peculiar, but highly pleasing, displayed adegree of vivacity , hardly ever to be found among men of pro-found and abstract speculation. His great liveliness, added tothe aptness to lose sight of himself, would sometimes lead himinto little eccentricities, that formed an amusing contrast withthe graver habits of a philosophic life ....  B u t  i t  i s  i m p o ssible
by words to convey any idea of the effect of his conversation,and of the impression made by so much philosophy , gaietyand humor, accompanied by a manner at once so animatedand simple. Things are made known only by comparison, andthat which is unique admits of no description.
What follows, then, is an effort to trace, largely through
Hutton’s life, the forces and ideas that came together to prove
that the earth was ancient—not eternal, but unknowably , incom-prehensibly old. The story is a rich one, filled with odd charac-ters, strong friendships, a uniquely social city , profoundlyoriginal ideas, and spectacular geology . The book will explore1 0 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

the notions that Hutton had to confront—the entrenched belief
in the young earth, and the accepted geologic theories that usedthe young-earth time frame as a starting point. It will also exam-ine the two environments that inspired Hutton—the physicalenvironment of Scotland and the intellectual environment cre-ated by the members of the Scottish Enlightenment. The ulti-mate establishment of the ancient earth was the result of aremarkable partnership—Hutton and his young colleagues JohnPlayfair and James Hall—in which one man so inspired hisyounger charges that they put their own ambitious careers onhold so that they could protect their mentor’s legacy . Finally , thebook will detail the profound influence that James Hutton hadon two nineteenth-century scientists whose work remains pow-erfully significant today—Charles Lyell, whose view of geologystill provides one of the foundations for the field 175 years later,and Charles Darwin, whose theory of evolution only becomesmore important as time goes on.11 PROLOGUE



1
Looking So Far Into 
the Abyss of Time
On us who saw these phenomena for the first time, the impression
m a d e  w i l l  n o t  e a s i l y  b e  f o r g o t t e n ....  W e  o f t e n  s a i d  t o  o u r s e l v e s ,
What clearer evidence could we have had of the different formation of
these rocks, and of the long interval which separated their formation,
had we actually seen them emerging from the bosom of the deep?
John Playfair, 1805
On a sunny June afternoon in 1788, three gentlemen from
Edinburgh, along with several farmhands, boarded a boat on a
desolate Scottish beach. After clearing the waves, they begansailing south along the North Sea coast. The men were in searchof a rock exposure on the battered cliffs that would prove one ofthe most stunning claims in the history of science—that the earthwas ancient beyond calculation. In the late eighteenth century , asin all centuries since the formation of the Christian church, this
13

was a blasphemous statement. The Scottish Presbyterian
Church, the English Anglican Church, the Lutheran Church,and the Catholic Church—indeed, all Christian churches, theirclergies, and their followers—believed that the earth was noteven 6,000 years old. This belief was a tenet based on rigorousanalysis of the Bible and other holy scriptures. It was not just thedevout who embraced this belief; most men of science agreedthat the earth was young. In fact, the most famous of them all,Isaac Newton, had completed a formal calculation of the age ofthe earth before he died in 1727, and his influential chronologyconfirmed that the biblical scholars were right.
The assertion that the earth was not so young had been
made by one of the gentlemen seated in the boat. Three yearsearlier, Dr. James Hutton, an amateur naturalist who had spentdecades studying minerals and their positions in the earth, hadaddressed an audience of the Royal Society of Edinburgh,which included some of Europe’s most accomplished men ofscience.
1He boldly announced that his theory of the earth in
dicated that it was immeasurably old. Though he certainly commanded the attention of his audience that day , he did notpersuade many . Perhaps no one. Because of his failure to gainadherents to his theory , one that he felt was so obviously true,Hutton had spent the last three years doing focused fieldwork in1 4 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME
1It should be noted that the term “scientist” was not coined until the 1830s;
before then, individuals who studied the sciences called themselves natural
philosophers. Because this term is awkward for readers in the twenty-first century ,I shall use “scientist” from this point forward.

an effort to find geologic formations that would convince his
skeptics. T wo of them were with him in the boat.
Hutton was now sixty-two years old, but had the energy and
stamina of a much younger man. Bald and very thin, he musthave looked a bit like W ashington Irving’s character IchabodCrane; attached to his long, thin face was a prominent aquilinenose, and his portrait suggests that he had spindly arms andlegs. Acquaintances observed that he tended to dress in thesame shade of brown nearly every day , and his plain attire wasrather out of fashion. Although Hutton had a medical degree, henever practiced medicine and his private income allowed him tolead a life of leisure. Unmarried, he lived with his sisters in acomfortable house in Edinburgh.
Most who knew the doctor agreed that he was a bit odd, or
at least eccentric. But, lovably so. He often seemed to lose sightof himself, making unusual faces and movements when hebecame excited: “The fire of his expression on such occasions,and the animation of his countenance and manner, are not to bedescribed; they were always seen with great delight by thosewho could enter into his sentiments, and often with great aston-ishment by those who could not.” This passion was especiallyapparent when he was engaged in conversation, speaking in hisbroad Scots accent, about some topic that interested him. And itseemed that nearly every topic did interest him. Despite hisquirks, his numerous friends were devoted to him, and they rec-ognized that he was a serious and able scholar.
One of the two skeptics on board was John Playfair. A pro-
fessor of mathematics at the University of Edinburgh since15 LOOKING SO FAR INTO THE ABYSS OF TIME

1785, he was considered among the cleverest men in Scotland,
a nation unusually blessed with distinguished intellects at thistime. Handsome for his forty years, and very popular in Edin-burgh, he had a square jaw and a full head of dark hair combedforward like that of Julius Caesar. Playfair was a brilliant alge-braist, geometer, and astronomer, and in the years ahead hewould write what would become the standard text in Euclidiangeometry for the next half century . Though he had first met Hut-ton in 1781, he did not know what to expect from Hutton’s1785 lectures. Playfair was as stunned as everyone else in theroom by the assertion that the earth was ancient. As a formerPresbyterian minister, he had long ago internalized the Scottishchurch’s teaching about the young earth.
The other skeptic was Sir James Hall. A thin blade of a man,
with a pleasant face and small features, the twenty-seven-year-old had inherited a substantial fortune while still a teenager. Thecoastal estate that served as the home base for this excursion waspart of that inheritance. Hall also supplied the boat and the addi-tional hands to help sail it. Though still quite young, Sir Jameswas already an accomplished scientist. His granduncle andguardian, Sir John Pringle, was president of the Royal Society ,the most esteemed scientific body in the world and the formerintellectual home of Isaac Newton. Hall was particularly fasci-nated by chemistry and had recently become acquainted withthe great Antoine Lavoisier in Paris. Visiting the continent whenHutton gave his controversial lectures, Hall nonetheless read aprinted thirty-page abstract of the talks that had found its way tohim. His reaction mirrored that of the audience: He rejected it.1 6 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

T o call Playfair and Hall skeptics is a bit misleading. By June
1788, after countless face-to-face discussions with Hutton, they
had slowly been persuaded that the doctor’s theory was plausi-ble. But at the time of Hutton’s explosive lectures, the announce-ment that the earth was ancient was startling. It would be akin tobeing told today that the sun is not really the source of the earth’sheat and light, or that there actually is complex life on the moon.Though other natural philosophers had intimated that the earthwas not as young as six millennia, and one famous French scien-tist had recently argued that the earth was 75,000 years old, noone had ever gone as far as Hutton—or been so direct.
Also, a rigorous theory of the earth’s history and workings that
most scientists found compelling already existed. This theory waspromulgated in the 1770s by a talented German mineralogistnamed Abraham Gottlob W erner, who was a professor at a renowned German university . W erner argued that a “universalocean” had once blanketed the earth, creating all the formationsthat now existed. This was acceptable to the established religionsbecause the universal ocean harkened back either to Noah’s Floodor to Creation itself and the very first passages in the Book of Gen-esis: “And the spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters,”and “God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gatheredtogether unto one place, and let the dry land appear; and it was so.”W erner’s theory also appealed to the scientific community becauseit seemed to account for all the visible features on the earth.
Hutton’s general theory of the earth’s history was the oppo-
site of W erner’s, as different as heaven from hell. W erner believedthat the mountains, deserts, and farmlands had precipitated out17 LOOKING SO FAR INTO THE ABYSS OF TIME

of the receding water of the universal ocean; that is, as the ocean
slowly evaporated or was drawn into the earth, the land on whichhumans now lived formed and was revealed. This process hadhappened only once. Hutton, in contrast, saw new land spring-ing from below the already existing oceans, pushed up by the cal-
dron of extreme heat found within the earth. And he saw ithappening over and over, the earth following a constant patternof erosion followed by new land rising up from below the seas—the planet an efficient land-regenerating machine. Hutton rea-soned that this cycle had occurred at least three times duringgeologic history .
For Hutton there was no need to call upon unseen and
unknowable catastrophes from the past, such as the Deluge orthe universal ocean, to explain geologic formations; they were allunderstandable through the knowledge of processes still occur-ring. The inexorable forces of wind and rain, tides and waves,volcanoes and earthquakes, which the earth still experiencesevery day , formed the world we inhabit. All that was required, asHutton stated, was “immense time.”
Since giving the public lectures, Hutton had been remark-
ably successful in finding convincing proof that extreme subter-
ranean heat was an active agent in the formation of thecontinents. Although this finding alone was significant, it didnot necessarily follow that intense heat had led to the raising ofnew land above the oceans to replace the eroded land of formerregions. Hutton needed to find an exposure of rocks that some-how demonstrated his theorized cycle.1 8 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

Discovering such an outcrop was the quest of the three
sailors as they plied the waters of the North Sea. Hutton had
chosen to investigate here because he knew that this part ofScotland had two distinct types of surface rock. What wasbelieved to be the older of the two was a smooth, grayish stonethat mineralogists labeled “primary micaceous schistus” (todayit is called Silurian graywacke)—a type of shale. The other,younger rock, a coarse reddish stone, Hutton called the “sec-ondary sandstone strata” (today it is called the Upper Old RedSandstone). The doctor was convinced that the two rock groupsrepresented two separate erosion-sedimentation-uplift cycles,and that at some location the younger rock (the coarse red sand-stone) must come in contact with, and actually cover, the olderrock (the gray smooth stone). There was a chance that the junc-tion of the two formations would be visible on the coast, thanksto the intense erosion inflicted by the pounding winds and waterof the North Sea.
The men could conceivably have avoided using the boat, and
the attendant risk of the sea, by hiking along the coast. However,it was so rugged—there were ravines to cross, steep rock faces toclimb, and hills to circumnavigate—that it would have taken daysto see everything they were hoping to see on this one day .Besides, Hutton was too old to conduct the exploration by land.
After leaving the spot where they boarded the boat, the
Dunglass Burn beach, they sailed along a jagged coastline. Themild weather and low tide allowed them to sail near the shore,and the early afternoon sun gave maximum exposure to the cliffson their right. The rocks were from 50 to 70 feet high, grass and19 LOOKING SO FAR INTO THE ABYSS OF TIME

moss covering the tops. The relentless pummeling by the North
Sea gave the sharp juttings an ominous, almost clawlike shape.
About a half mile from Dunglass Burn, the boat came to the
first headland, Reed Point. The explorers rounded the point butcould detect no unusual formations from the boat; all that wasvisible was the dominant primary schistus. Hutton decided notto land, and the boat continued southward. They had to be extracareful along the next stretch of coast because, in addition to therugged cliffs, the waves broke against large rocks protrudingfrom the sea.
After several hundred yards, the boat skimmed past the next
headland, and the men turned their heads to witness a spectac-ular scene. Pease Bay dug deeply into the coast and was markedby a beautiful sandy beach stretching from end to end, at least200 yards long. What was striking was not the beach itself, butthe rock formation that emerged from it. Rising out of the sand,like a snake, was a beautiful red sandstone outcrop, whichseemed to burst out of the beach at a low 20-degree angle. Thered rocks grew to form a 50-foot cliff. The formation was cov-ered with a thin coating of grass and moss, but enough had been“cleaned” by the surf that the strata were clearly visible. Thesewere the secondary strata that Hutton was looking for. Still, asbeautiful as this exposure was, it did not contain the combina-tion of rock layers that Hutton hoped to find.
The team continued south. As the sailors looked up at the
rocky cliffs, they saw the angular stone wall of a now roofless andabandoned chapel at the top of one of the hills, probably just afew hundred yards from the edge of the bluff. It was an unusual2 0 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

sight in such a desolate spot. Maybe this previously sacred land
would now mark a different kind of shrine.
The boat quickly neared Siccar Point, the next headland
on their course. After they rounded the protrusion, Huttonurged the pilot to land the boat. The sand of Pease Bay unfor-tunately did not extend to Siccar Point, so the boat scraped toa halt on rutted stone. But no one cared much about the boat.As they stood on the rocky beach staring up at the cliff face totheir right, it was as if they were looking at a painting left by theCreator to show the wonder of His world. At the bottom of thecliff was the gray-colored primary micaceous schistus expo-sure, but the layers were not horizontal like the ones seen on atypical quarry wall. They were vertical, standing straight up,like a row of books on a shelf. Above the booklike layers sat acouple of feet of nondescript muddle, composed of large frag-ments of the schistus. Then, above the hardened muck wasanother large exposure of layered rocks, but these layers werehorizontal and they had the distinct red hue of the exposurejust seen at Pease Bay .
Hutton, an animated man at all times, was gleeful. Upon col-
lecting himself, he explained to his companions what they wereobserving. The schistus that was now vertical had originally beenlaid down in horizontal deposits, the only way that sediments canform. Eroded grains from an ancient continent had flowed into asea and settled at the bottom. Since deposits usually settle at amodest rate, perhaps only an inch a year, it took hundreds ofthousands of years for enough sediment to build up and applythe pressure to the bottom layers that caused them to be changed21 LOOKING SO FAR INTO THE ABYSS OF TIME

to rock. Subterranean heat also assisted in this transformation.2
Then, the intensity of the heat, and perhaps some other addi-
tional force, had caused the once horizontal strata to buckle theway a leather belt would if you held it taut between your handsand then brought your hands together. As a result, the layersfolded and became vertical; in the process they also rose abovesea level. The once-submerged stratified rocks had become dryland. Immediately , erosion began to work its magic all over again,causing the removal of the tops of the buckled rocks. Over time,this land became covered by water again, either from the sea levelrising or the land sinking, because the layer of stony muddle rep-resented the early stages of submersion, when waves broke uprocks along the shore. Then, as the vertical stratified rocks settleddeeply under the water, new sediments started piling up, thistime formed with red-hued grains from different surface rocks.Eventually , these new sediments also consolidated into rocks,affected by pressure and the same subterranean heat that hadonce acted on the vertical strata. Hutton and his friends were nowlooking at this dry-land exposure because the area had beenraised above the sea yet again, but with less violence this timesince there was no new buckling. Collectively , the making of Siccar Point must have taken an unfathomable length of time—much, much longer than 6,000 years.2 2 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME
2Hutton believed that both pressure and heat were needed to form sedimen-
tary rocks; it is now known that heat is not necessary for the formation of sedi-
mentary rocks, though it is needed for metamorphic rocks. See Appendix fordetails.

Finally , here was irrefutable proof. The earth was immea-
surably old. How old? Who could even venture a guess? How
old was the sun? How old was the solar system?
John Playfair would later write of this triumphant moment:
W e felt ourselves necessarily carried back to the time when
the schistus on which we stood was yet at the bottom of thesea, and when the sandstone before us was only beginning tobe deposited in the shape of sand or mud, from the waters ofa superincumbent ocean. An epocha still more remote pre-sented itself, when even the most ancient of the rocks insteadof standing upright in vertical beds, lay in horizontal planesat the bottom of the sea, and was not yet disturbed by thatimmeasurable force which has burst asunder the solid pave-ment of the globe. Revolutions still more remote appeared inthe distance of this extraordinary perspective. The mindseemed to grow giddy by looking so far into the abyss of time.
Back on the boat and heading north again to the Dunglass
Burn beach, the explorers were no doubt aware of the impor-
tance of their find. Hutton was such a positive and rational man,so generous in his opinion of others, that he probably underes-timated the forces that would rise up against him. But Playfairlikely did not. As a former Presbyterian minister, he understoodthe hold the church’s teachings had on people, educated anduneducated. The belief that the earth was less than 6,000 yearsold was deeply entrenched in the psyche of most Christians. Just23 LOOKING SO FAR INTO THE ABYSS OF TIME

as important, Playfair knew how vigorously the church pro-
tected subjects on which it held a position. The church and thescholars who supported it would not graciously cede the historyof the earth to the impious, perhaps blasphemous, Hutton. Thebattle for the truth was just beginning.2 4 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

2
First Came Adam and Eve, 
Then Came Cain and Abel . . .
And Adam lived a hundred and thirty years, and begat a son in his own
likeness, after his image; and called his name Seth:
And the days of Adam after he had begotten Seth were eight hundred
years: and he begat sons and daughters:
And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years:
and he died.
And Seth lived an hundred and five years, and begat Enos:
And Enos lived ninety years, and begat Cainan:
Gen. 5:3–9
The bishops huddled in twos and threes while seated on
the wooden benches that ringed the large ornate room. They
were anxious for the ceremony to begin because the heat of the
25

mid-morning was already starting to penetrate the hall. Quietly ,
the large door at the end of the room opened, and a dozen mendressed simply but impressively in clean white robes silentlyformed a semicircle. With no fanfare, the Roman Emperor Con-stantine I finally emerged. Looking like an oriental sultan in apurple robe embellished with a large medallion, Constantinewalked slowly past the now-standing bishops. When he reachedthe front of the gathering, he was brought a small wooden stoolveneered with gold. If the bishops were going to sit on the hardbenches day after day , then Constantine would join them in theirdiscomfort.
Constantine turned to face the bishops, sat down on his
stool, and signaled for the others to do the same. Thus began theCouncil of Nicaea, the first-ever meeting of bishops intended toformalize Christian doctrine.
1Constantine spoke in Latin, his
native language, but many of those present knew only Greek andneeded whispered translations. During the few minutes hespoke, he stressed his appreciation for those who had traveled sofar and his determination that the deliberations of this meetingbe undertaken with the utmost seriousness.
Constantine had called this extraordinary and unprece-
dented convocation of bishops in the summer of 
A.D. 325
because there was a crisis in the church, and he wanted itresolved immediately . The crisis was a deepening controversy2 6 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME
1Nicaea is now called Iznit, T urkey , and it was chosen by Constantine
because it was close to the newly founded and still-under-construction city of
Constantinople.

over two views of Jesus Christ. One group of bishops believed
that Christ was equal in every way to God the Father. The otherbelieved that because Jesus had been born, it followed that hehad not existed forever, and therefore he could not be com-pletely equal to the Father. Constantine had no opinion on thematter. He just wanted the argument ended so that he could goback to converting pagans to Christianity—the task that he sawas his true mission as emperor. If his own religion was riddledwith controversy , how could he expect it to be attractive to non-believers? So resolute was he about complete attendance that hehad ordered the invitations to be hand-delivered by Roman sol-diers. The solders then waited to escort the attending bishops toNicaea.
2
It was Constantine who had given the Christian bishops the
freedom to argue over such questions. Just over a dozen yearsearlier, Christians had feared for their very existence. But in 312,Constantine saw a vision of a cross that inspired him to win acritical battle. He was sure the vision had been sent by Christ.Constantine immediately converted to Christianity and thenissued the Edict of Milan, which legalized the faith. Over thenext few years, as Constantine succeeded in unifying Roman ter-ritory , Christianity became the official religion of the empire.
Sitting in the circle of bishops listening to Constantine was
Eusebius, the bishop of Caesarea. He had endorsed the viewthat Jesus Christ was not equal to the Father, which placed him27 FIRST CAME ADAM AND EVE
2Pope Sylvester, who was very frail and elderly at this time, was one of the few
church officials not in attendance.

in the minority , and he was effectively on probation by his fellow
bishops. The Council of Nicaea would decide whether he wasto be excommunicated. Now an old man in his mid-sixties,Eusebius had already spent time in prison as a persecutedChristian when he was a young man in his native Palestine. Hesurely did not want to return to a prison cell.
Eusebius was a prolific writer who, in earlier years, had writ-
ten several popular books, including one on the history of themartyrs. One of his strategies for returning to the good graces ofhis fellow bishops and the church was to make a direct appeal tothe emperor. He decided to prepare a new edition of one of hisold books in honor of Constantine. The book was a chronologyof world history , which he had originally written some thirtyyears earlier. It was a compendium of all the known peoples andtheir histories from the beginning of time until the present. Healso wrote a completely new book for the emperor, this one ahistory of the Christian church, starting with the birth of Christand ending with the conversion of Constantine.
When Eusebius gave the books to Constantine, the emperor
was pleased. He was particularly fascinated by how Eusebiushad gone about constructing his chronology , combining as hedid the histories of the Jews, Egyptians, Assyrians, Greeks, andRomans. In addition to straight narrative, Eusebius had createdgraphlike grids in which he synchronized the various events ofdifferent cultures. Here, for instance, is his narrative descriptionof the birth of Christ:
“It was in the forty-second year of the reign of Augustus and
the twenty-eighth after the subjugation of Egypt and the death of2 8 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

Antony and Cleopatra, with whom the dynasty of the Ptolemies
in Egypt came to an end, that our Savior and Lord Jesus Christwas born in Bethlehem of Judea.”
And, here is his graphic rendering of the same seminal
event:
Y ear of 
Abraham Olympiad Roman Egyptian
2010 OL 194 Augustine 28
42
Every entry in the graphs began with the “Y ear of Abra-
ham”; that is, the number of years after the birth of Abraham.The “Olympiad” column refers to when the event happenedaccording to the Olympiad system, the four-year periods thatthe Greeks started using in the early eighth century 
B.C.
Constantine admired the rigor of this work, and he ordered
many copies to be prepared and circulated throughout Romanterritory . Because of this official support, Eusebius’s chronologywould soon be known throughout the empire. And it did serveits immediate purpose—the emperor insisted that Eusebius beallowed to retain his position as bishop.
The chronology acquired even greater influence seventy
years later when St. Jerome translated Eusebius’s Greek intoLatin, thus making the book available in the two languages ofChristendom. St. Jerome’s involvement with the text demon-strates its status; he was ordered by Pope Damascus in 382 toperform two translations for the church, the Bible and Euse-bius’s Chronology. St. Jerome’s translation of the Bible, finished29 FIRST CAME ADAM AND EVE

in A.D. 405, was called the Vulgate; it would be the first book
printed by Johannes Gutenberg over a thousand years later, and
it would serve as the basis of the King James Bible. It is still thefoundational Christian Bible of all those in use today . Similarly ,St. Jerome’s translation of Eusebius would be the document thatwould inspire chronologists for the next 1,400 years, reinforcingthe notion of a young earth and making James Hutton’s attemptto refute it far more difficult.
In writing his chronology, Eusebius borrowed openly and
with acknowledgment from three sources: the Hebrew Bible
(what essentially became the Old T estament), and the works oftwo earlier writers whose efforts might have been lost if notfor Eusebius—Flavius Josephus and Julius Africanus. The ver-sion of the Hebrew Bible used by Eusebius is now called theSeptuagint Bible, roughly translated to mean “the seventy .” Leg-end has it that in 286 
B.C., Ptolemy II, whose father had suc-
ceeded Alexander the Great in the newly established Egyptiankingdom, ordered the book of the Jews to be translated intoGreek so that he would gain the favor of his recently conqueredJewish population. T o complete this task correctly and quickly ,he brought seventy-two Israelites—six from each of the twelvetribes—to the capital city of Alexandria, and he gave them seventy-two days to finish their work. The scholars wereinspired by God, and though they worked in isolation from oneanother, their efforts matched perfectly when finished. Thetruth is quite different. When Ptolemy II came to power, a stan-dard version of the Hebrew Bible did not exist; the Holy Scrip-3 0 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

tures varied from tribe to tribe and were largely based on oral
tradition. That tradition was being threatened by the disuse ofHebrew among the Jews in Egypt. T o impress the large Jewishpopulation in his kingdom, Ptolemy II sponsored a translation,and during his long reign scholars working in the great libraryof Alexandria produced one.
This version of the Hebrew Bible had tremendous influ-
ence. Since it was in Greek, then the dominant language of theMiddle East, it was accessible to all Jews. Perhaps more impor-tant, because the book was conceived and written in the thrivingintellectual capital of Alexandria and sanctioned by the emperor,many copies were produced and distributed. In fact, it was oneof the most copied books in the world before the invention of theprinting press. This was the Bible that Jesus and all his follow-ers used.
For Eusebius’s chronology , the Septuagint Bible was impor-
tant because the first part, the Pentateuch, also known as theBook of Moses and containing the Book of Genesis, stressed thehistory of the Jews, from Creation to the death of Moses. It gaveexplicit years for the life spans of the various individuals men-tioned, so that every Jew knew Adam had lived to be 930 yearsold, Noah 950, and that Abraham was 175 and Moses 120 whenthey died. For Eusebius and all future chronologists, theseexplicit life spans were always the starting point.
Three and one-half centuries after the death of Ptolemy II,
the next key historical manuscript was created. Unlike the Sep-tuagint Bible, this one had but one author, Flavius Josephus.Josephus was born in Jerusalem in 
A.D. 37, just a few years after31 FIRST CAME ADAM AND EVE

the death of Christ. He was one of the leaders of the failed Jew-
ish revolt against the Romans in A.D. 66. After the rebellion was
squashed, Josephus went into hiding. He mysteriously surviveda suicide pact with the other rebel leaders, only to be capturedby Roman soldiers and taken to Rome. He must have been quitecharismatic because he convinced Emperor V espasian to let himlive as a free man in Rome. And live he did. For the rest of his lifethis former rebel led a privileged life among the Roman elite.Josephus became an extraordinarily prolific writer. His mostimportant work was a history of the Jews, which he titled Jewish
Antiquities. Somewhat ironically , given that Josephus owed his
life and high status to his Roman supporters, the goal of Antiq-uities was to demonstrate that the Jews had the longest history
of all peoples, including the Greeks and Romans. Using the Sep-tuagint Bible and later works of Jewish scholars, his historybegan with Creation and ended with the Jewish war againstRome, the one he helped lead.
Josephus’s Antiquities was the first attempt at a world his-
tory , but he was not concerned about determining the age of theworld. That distinction fell on Julius Africanus, the first truechronologist.
3Though Josephus had used Greek and Roman
historians as sources for the last centuries of his history , he haddepended exclusively on the Bible for the previous millennia.3 2 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME
3Julius Africanus was the father of biblical chronology and his work was long
and elaborate, but Theophilus of Antioch (115–180) produced a brief yet detailed
chronology about fifty years before him (it was found in the eleventh century); itis not known whether Julius used Theophilus’s work.

Not Julius Africanus. Julius’s history of the world, which he titled
the Chronologia , was the first attempt to juxtapose Hebrew
sources with ancient Greek, Egyptian, and Persian sources tolocate dates, an innovation that Eusebius would take to a newlevel. Look, for example, at how Julius handled Moses: “And ifone carries the calculation backwards from the end of the captiv-ity , there are 1,237 years. Thus, by analysis, the same period isfound to be the first year of the Exodus of Israel under Mosesfrom Egypt, as from the 55th Olympiad to Ogygus, who foundedEleusis. And from this point we get a more notable beginning forAttic chronography .”
Julius was born in what is now Libya in about 
A.D. 160. He
was a pagan who served in the Roman army and then discoveredChristianity . By 215 he was ordained, had studied at the acad-emy in Alexandria, and was the priest for the town of Emmaus.He wrote his chronology between the years 212 and 221.
How Julius constructed his chronology is worth looking at
in detail because his approach was essentially followed over andover again by all future chronologists. Though Eusebius’schronology would be more widely read, it relied heavily onJulius for basic information and techniques. The Old T estamentwas Julius’s key document, the major events being the bench-marks for the chronology . The Old T estament is largely a historyof the Jews. It begins with Creation, and continues with the sto-ries of Adam and Eve, Noah and the Flood, Abraham and theentry into the Promised Land, the stories of Abraham’s sonIsaac, Isaac’s son Jacob, and Jacob’s son Joseph. The first partends with the enslavement of the Jews by the Egyptians, and33 FIRST CAME ADAM AND EVE

then Moses leading the Exodus of the Jews out of Egypt and the
delivery of the T en Commandments. After the death of Moses,the history of the Jews becomes more convoluted. The high-lights that Julius focused on included Joshua and the capture ofJericho, the reign of King David (the David who slew Goliath),King Solomon and the building of the great Jewish temple inJerusalem, the fall of Jerusalem to the Babylonians, the Jewishcaptivity in Babylonia, and finally the Jews’ triumphant return toJerusalem and the rebuilding of the temple.
Julius’s first task was to determine how much time had
elapsed from the birth of Adam, which was five days after thebeginning of Creation, to the Deluge, or Noah’s Flood. Usingthe ages of the descendants of Adam detailed in the Septuagint,Julius determined that the rains started 2,261 years after Cre-ation. He believed that the Flood lasted twelve months, thus theyear 2262 marks the beginning of the post-Flood period.
The next chapter in the Chronologia covers the period from
when Noah first stepped off the ark to when the great father ofthe Jews, Abraham, entered the Promised Land. Julius calcu-lated that this period lasted another 1,015 years. So Abrahamcrossed the Euphrates River into Canaan in the year 3277. ByJulius’s reckoning, Abraham represented the twentieth genera-tion after Adam.
The third major chapter is from the entry into the Promised
Land to when Moses delivered the T en Commandments. Julius,using various sources in addition to the Bible now , arrived at aperiod of 430 years. Thus, the Exodus of the Jews from Egyptunder Moses’s leadership occurred in the year 3707.3 4 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

From Exodus on, Julius’s chore became more difficult
because the Book of Moses, which had paid such close attention
to the ages of the Hebrew forefathers, comes to an end. Not to bedeterred, Julius calculated that 585 years separated the T enCommandments and the dedication of the great Jewish templein Jerusalem, built by King Solomon, bringing the chronologyup to the year 4292. The period beginning with the dedicationof the temple and culminating in its destruction by the Babylo-nians lasted another 651 years. Finally , the birth of Jesus Christtook place in the 5,500th year after Creation.
Julius brought his Chronologia up to 
A.D. 221, the year he
completed the book. He was explicit in stating that Jesus Christ
was born five and one-half millennia after the beginning of time.This was significant, because Julius was not simply writing aworld history with a focus on dates. In fact, his real purpose wasto give context to biblical prophesy . He was most concernedwith predicting the second coming of Christ, the thousand-yearreign described in the Book of Revelation, the last book of theNew T estament. This would be another characteristic of allfuture chronologies; despite the rigor and attention to detail,their ultimate purpose was to determine when the temporalworld of evil and suffering would end and the profoundly betterworld led by Jesus would begin. Early Christians were perse-cuted and their savior had been murdered, thus the SecondComing was not just an intriguing idea; it was an anxiouslyawaited event. Julius predicted that the present world wouldcontinue until the year 
A.D. 500—6,000 years after Creation.35 FIRST CAME ADAM AND EVE

After that, the Messiah—Jesus Christ—would return to the ter-
restrial sphere to begin his thousand-year reign, the period ofheaven on earth. All future chronologists would calculate theearth’s age to be 6,000 years at the time of the Second Coming.In the year 1650, the last well-known chronologist, JamesUssher, would date the beginning of the world at 4004 
B.C.; this
gave him nearly 350 years until the end of the sixth millennium.
Where does the 6,000 years come from? Julius was merely
the first to put into writing what was a long-held popular belief.This belief came from a conflation of various revered nonbibli-cal writings and specific passages from the Bible. Perhaps themost important passage from Scriptures came from the JewishT almud. There was found the famous prophesy ascribed to theprophet Elijah that stated the world would exist for 6,000 years,the first 2,000 being the void, the next 2,000 being the period ofthe T orah, and the last 2,000 being the period of the Messiah.Equally influential was a collective exercise in popular numerol-ogy . The number 7 is found throughout the Book of Revela-tion—it was considered a number that represented God—and itcoincided with the seven days of Creation in the Book of Gene-sis. But on the last day God had rested. Thus, it actually tookonly six days to create the earth and all the creatures that livedon it. The first six days of Creation coincide with the number 6in Revelation: the number for Satan.
All Christians and Jews knew that the world became con-
taminated the day Satan tempted Eve, causing Adam and Eve’sejection from the Garden of Eden. Only with the Second Com-ing would Satan be destroyed and evil eliminated. Revelation3 6 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

clearly stated that after the Second Coming, Christ would rule
for a millennium. T wo specific places in the Bible state that aday is like 1,000 years to God: In the Old T estament, Ps. 90:4states, “For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterdaywhen it is past, and as a watch in the night”; and, in the NewT estament, 2 Pet. 3:8 states, “But, beloved, be not ignorant ofthis one thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousandyears, and a thousand years as one day .” The popular belief wasthat the coming thousand-year reign of Jesus Christ must be theseventh millennium, and that Satan had dominated the previ-ous six millennia. In many sources, in fact, the final millenniumwas called “the great Sabbatism”—the great Sabbath, drawingan even more solid connection to the seventh day of Genesis.The first coming of Christ was during the sixth millennium,coinciding with the sixth day of Creation, the day Adam wascreated.
Julius’s great contribution was to give Christians the docu-
mentation and proof they wanted for an idea that was alreadyfully embraced. Eusebius, by being the church’s first key histo-rian at the time of Constantine and the establishment of the legalChristian church, provided the needed ratification of Julius’schronology . Julius’s and Eusebius’s careful works would be thebenchmarks for all future chronologists; their successors wouldsimply dot i’s and cross t’s. But, their successors would contin-ually push back the end of the 6,000 years, as each threshold forthe Second Coming neared. St. Jerome, Eusebius’s translator,was the first to practice this form of recalculation; he placed thebirth of Christ at 5,200 years since Creation, putting off the end37 FIRST CAME ADAM AND EVE

of the sixth millennium until A.D. 800. This kind of fudging was
easily done and sparked no controversy because there was
enough uncertainty in the original figures to allow for reinter-pretation. The chronologists were consistent in putting off theend of the sixth millennium until a couple of hundred years aftertheir own deaths.
At the time that St. Jerome was finishing his translation of
Eusebius into Latin, the Roman Empire was teetering on its last
legs. Less than 100 years earlier, when Constantine had consoli-dated the Roman Empire and made Christianity its official reli-gion, the empire was as dominant as ever. Unfortunately forRome, its enemies were numerous, they were arrayed all along theextensive border, and they had learned from their strategic mis-steps over the past 700 years. When they attacked Rome now , theystruck with gigantic armies, often numbering well over 100,000men. A series of bloody conflicts in the first decade of the fifth cen-tury culminated in 410 with the sacking of the city of Rome by theoverwhelming Visigoth army , led by Alaric. This marked the firsttime Rome had fallen to invaders in over a thousand years. It alsomarked the beginning of the end of the Roman Empire in Europeand the commencement of what is now called the Dark Ages.
Of course, the Dark Ages did not begin on August 24, 410,
the day that Rome capitulated. The disintegration of the RomanEmpire was a gradual process. In the west, though the sacking ofRome was a major turning point, it took several decades beforethe Visigoths, V andals, Burgundians, and Franks wrested com-plete control from Rome. By 476, though, it was over. After Attila3 8 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

the Hun had invaded the Italian peninsula and the V andals had
sacked Rome a second time, Italy and all of Europe were con-trolled by the various Germanic and Baltic tribes. In the east, theold Roman Empire held on for another couple of centuries in theguise of the Byzantine Empire, but it was eventually overrun bythe Bulgars from the northwest and the Muslims from the east.
Though the political structure of the empire collapsed slowly ,
Roman culture unraveled quickly . The loss of stability in the earlyfifth century took a high toll on scholarship and education.Though the tribes that overran the Roman Empire were not thebloodthirsty barbarians of popular myth, their cultures were mar-tial and violent. Because they had no written languages, there wasno legacy of scholarship. Thus, the traditions that cultivated Jose-phus, Julius, and Eusebius eventually disappeared. For the nextthousand years, learning in Europe would be largely confined tothe Catholic monasteries and seminaries; these had sprung up inRoman and “barbarian” territory in the fourth and fifth centuriesand were left unmolested by the Visigoths, V andals, and Franks.
Because of the general chaos and uncertainty that followed
the Roman Empire’s collapse, it is not surprising that apocalyp-tic prophesy grew increasingly popular. Just as Hebrew proph-esy had its greatest flowering during the decades the Jews wereenslaved by the Babylonians, the centuries after the fall of Romerepresented another great flowering. Many new chronologieswere produced, most very explicit about predicting the end ofthe sixth millennium and the Second Coming. They retainedJulius’s basic scheme, but they adjusted the end dates, and theyoften drew an even tighter connection to the six days of Creation. 39 FIRST CAME ADAM AND EVE

The most influential chronologies were calculated by
Isidore of Seville (560–636) and Bede the V enerable (673–735).
Later chronologists became more daring. Joachim of Fiore’s(1135–1202) writings drove thousands of peasants in southernEurope into mass hysteria as they waited for the Second Comingin 1260. One of the more intriguing chronologists, Otto of Freis-ing (1111–1158), argued that the thousand-year “binding” ofSatan (an interpretation of Revelation) was occurring at preciselythat moment. Freising asserted that the Devil had been bound in325 by the Council of Nicaea, which had unified the church, andhe would remain bound until 1325. Afterward, he would escapeand wreak havoc for a short period before the Second Coming ofthe Savior.
The medieval Catholic Church may have preferred the
unbinding of Satan to what actually happened less than 200
years later. It is difficult to exaggerate the influence of MartinLuther, so successful was his reformist movement, launchedwith the posting of the 95 Theses on the door of WittenburgCathedral in 1517. The speed and extent of the Protestant Ref-ormation in Europe were unprecedented. Prophesy becamepronounced again as new Protestants looked for signs in theScriptures that predicted their breaking from the church. Manyprophetic writings were circulated, invariably with the pope castas the antichrist. Luther himself produced many of these antipa-pal apocalyptic tracts.
For a variety of complicated reasons, Luther stopped active
participation in the administration of his new church rather early ,4 0 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

but he never stopped teaching and preaching. And, most impor-
tant, he never stopped writing. His followers waited eagerly forhis words, which were printed and distributed widely (Lutherwas the first religious reformer to have access to the printingpress, invented in the 1450s). Luther was strident in his beliefthat the Bible was the inspired word of God, and that the Scrip-tures must be interpreted literally . He turned to chronology latein life, when he wrote Supputatio Annorum Mundi. As with
everything he published, his chronology had a tremendousimpact. He followed the basic style of Julius and Eusebius, but hemade a significant adjustment for the end of the sixth millen-nium. Writing in 1541, Luther calculated that Creation occurredin 3961 
B.C., thus giving his Protestant followers nearly 500 years
to prepare for the return of Christ. From this point on, chronolo-gies would follow Luther’s lead and consistently set Creation atapproximately 4000 
B.C. T o justify his sharp adjustment, Luther
leaned heavily on the prophesy of Elijah, which proclaimed thatthe last 2,000 years of the total 6,000 would be the Age of theMessiah. Thus, the Second Coming would occur 2,000 yearsafter the birth of Christ, around the year 2000. In fact, on the verytitle page of his chronology , Luther quoted the famous prophesy:
Elia Propheta, Sex milibus annorum stabit mundus.
Duobos milibus inane. Duobus milibus Lex.Duobus milibus Messiah. Insti sunt Sex dies hebdomadae
coram Deo.
Septimus dies Sabbatum acternum est. Psalm 90. Et 1 Pet 2Mille anni sicut dies unus.41 FIRST CAME ADAM AND EVE

A century after Luther, the last of the influential chronolo-
gists, James Ussher, archbishop of Armaugh, refined Luther’s
calculations. More than 2,000 printed pages, the Annales Veteris
T estamenti (Annals of the Old T estament; 1650) took the Calvin-
ist Ussher over two decades to complete. Annales left a lasting
legacy because it was used by the editors of the King JamesBible, where Ussher’s dates were placed in the margins. Afterbiblical chronology fell out of fashion in the nineteenth century ,the archbishop became infamous for the outlandishness of hisprecise statements, the most familiar being that Creation startedon Sunday at noon on October 23, 4004 
B.C. However, the pre-
cision found in the Annales was very much in keeping with the
tradition of chronology as it had evolved over the centuries. TheKing James Bible was produced in vast numbers and it was in -expensive enough for every Christian family in the  English-speaking world to own one; thus Ussher’s calculations wereingrained in the minds of several generations of British subjectsbefore James Hutton announced his findings.
The Annales would be the high-water mark for biblical
chronology , the final chapter of a tradition that began with theSeptuagint Bible, continued with Julius Africanus and thenEusebius, was passed on to Isidore and Bede, and then Luther.A modern reader might well ask, “Surely the scientific commu-nity didn’t blindly follow such religious documents?” As anindication of just how difficult James Hutton’s task was, themost famous scientist of his era, Isaac Newton (1642–1727),also privately produced his own chronology toward the endof his life. Moreover, Newton was following in the footsteps of4 2 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

the most important astronomer before him, Johannes Kepler
(1571–1630), whose chronology built on Luther’s and whosecalculations were, in turn, used by Ussher. Kepler, in fact, iscredited with the discovery , now confirmed, that Christ wasborn not in the year 0, but rather in 4 
B.C. Newton was a sur-
prisingly spiritual man who was captivated by the Book of Rev-ela tion and the Book of Daniel, which is the most prophesy-filled chapter of the Old T estament. Newton admittedto a princess in 1716 that he had been working on a chronology ,off and on, for decades. His secret out, Newton exerted a greatdeal of energy in the last years of his life to keep the chronologyfrom the public. But after he died in 1727, his chronology wasquickly disseminated. Like all those that had come before, itessentially followed Julius’s outline, though the specific dateslargely agreed with Ussher’s.
In June 1726, Isaac Newton was an eighty-three-year-old
man passing the last year of his life in the village of Kensington,not far from London. Three hundred miles to the north, a babywas born to William and Sarah Hutton in the city of Edinburgh.The child, James, would one day extend Newton’s discoverythat nature obeyed constant laws, putting an end to 1,500 yearsof biblical chronology , and profoundly changing the way Chris-tians viewed the world.43 FIRST CAME ADAM AND EVE

This page intentionally left blank 

3
Auld Reekie
She resolved to bestow on him a liberal education . . .
John Playfair, 1805
It is fitting that James Hutton, the discoverer of the earth’s
antiquity and the father of modern geology , was born in Edin-
burgh, the capital of Scotland. Surely no other city was moredefined by its geology . Standing not two miles from the Firth ofForth, the finger of a bay that opens into the North Sea, theEdinburgh of James Hutton’s day was picturesque, but theweathered topography belied a violent and chaotic antiquity . Infact, the geologic history of the area was a textbook study of thevery processes that Hutton would later discover; it had alter-nated from sea to dry land at least four times in the distant past.Geologists have now determined that volcanic activity firstoccurred in the area approximately 400 million years ago. Overthe next 45 million years, the region quieted and the low-lying
45

plain around the volcanoes became flooded by tropical seas. A
second wave of volcanism struck the area a few million yearslater (about 350 million years ago), forming a series of cones andraising the entire region above the sea. For the next 65 millionyears, the area was largely calm. However, the tropical or semi-tropical environment vacillated between low-lying forested landand flooded shallow seas. During the lengthy periods when theland was flooded, sediments formed from eroded grains anddead saltwater organisms settling at the bottom of the sea; overtime, the sediments almost buried the volcanic cones. Then, atthe 285-million-year mark, violence returned, again in the formof volcanic activity . This time, though, the magma did not breakthrough the surface, instead remaining just below . The magma“intruded” into the sedimentary rocks, and was later—muchlater—revealed when erosion exposed it. Geologists now call anexposure of intruded magma either a dike or a sill. Thirty-fivemillion years later (now 250 million years ago), the region wasstruck by a series of earthquakes, the result of mountain-build-ing pressure that pushed and distorted the sedimentary strata.After this episode, geologic calm finally returned. Because thearea was now permanently above sea level, erosion of theexposed land was the primary agent of change. Finally , 2 millionyears ago, the last great ice age engulfed the region and buried itunder glacial ice.
Thus, all the hills that now define the Edinburgh region are
remnants of the ancient volcanic activity . None is more impres-sive than Castle Rock. The landmark is a spectacular, nearlysymmetrical cylinder of basalt; a black, shiny rock that looks4 6 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

almost otherworldly . Formed from magma that remained inside
the ancient volcano rather than being forced out, the structure iscalled a volcanic plug. T oday , Castle Rock rises like a broad sky-scraper about 450 feet above the plain, essentially the same sizeat the summit as it is at the base. In fact, when one stands belowand looks up, the jagged surface appears to widen as it ascends.
Castle Rock was the highest part of Hutton’s Edinburgh, yet
most of the old town was built on another odd geologic structureattached to the mountain of basalt. It was formed when the lastice sheet flowed slowly over the area, moving west to east, scrap-ing across the land that came before it. It had little trouble grind-ing away and burying the softer rocks, but the basalt of CastleRock was a different matter. Because of its hardness, the icesheet was essentially forced to move over and around it. Afterpassing around Castle Rock, the ice left a long and thin wisp ofdebris attached to the volcanic plug. This kind of formation iscalled a crag and tail by geologists, and it resembles a comet.
When the ice age ended between 15,000 and 10,000 years agoand the glaciers melted away , the crag and tail remained as evi-dence of the chilly past. T oday , the tail looks like a gentle uphillramp, narrowing as it climbs, that connects the low-lying plainwith Castle Rock. Near the pinnacle, the tail is a sharp ridge,perhaps only 50 yards across, the land plunging a dramatic 400feet to the flat surface below .
As one approaches the city from the Firth of Forth to the
north, or from Glasgow to the west, Edinburgh rises majestically ,
as if out of a fairy tale, its neighboring hills standing as sentries.47 AULD REEKIE

Evidence shows that Castle Rock has been inhabited continu-
ously since Neolithic hunters and gatherers first migrated to the
region 4,000 years ago. Sheer on all sides except for the ramp-like approach from the east, the mount, which has about an acreof flat rock at the top, was easily defended because the inhabi-tants could see for dozens of miles in every direction. They couldsurvey the Firth of Forth to the north, and the hills to the southand east. A surprise attack was impossible. The same factors thatmade it attractive to the first humans made it attractive to all sub-sequent inhabitants of this part of Scotland, from the tribesknown as the Gododdins during the Roman era to the Anglesduring the Dark Ages. At some point, the settlement acquiredthe name Edwinesburgh, probably after King Edwin ofNorthumbria, who ruled the region in the early seventh century .Though Castle Rock was inhabited for thousands of years, thefirst to build a lasting structure at the top was King Malcolm III,who built the first stone castle and chapel (still standing) after hedefeated the infamous Macbeth in 1057. The town that sprangup was built completely within the castle’s protective walls. Aftera few decades, however, the needs of the inhabitants outgrewthese confines, and the first structures were built beyond thewalls and on the downward-sloping ridge.
About seventy-five years after the defeat of Macbeth, con-
struction began on the first large religious building in Edin-burgh. Holyrood Abbey was situated almost exactly a mile awayfrom the castle, at the end of the sloping “tail.” Built in the 1120sand 1130s by Malcolm III’s son, King David, the guesthouse ofthe continuously expanding religious compound was later con-4 8 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

verted into the royal residence, called the Palace of Holyrood-
house. From Holyrood, the kings and queens of Scotland ruledthe country , the castle now being reserved for military purposes.Connecting the castle and Holyrood was the town’s main thor-oughfare, High Street. The cathedral, St. Giles, completed in1243, was built a couple of hundred yards below the castle, righton High Street. Castle at the top, palace and abbey below , andSt. Giles in the middle of the connecting High Street—thesewere the focal points of Edinburgh. By the year of James Hut-ton’s birth, 1726, the castle was massive, its 30-foot-high fortresswalls running along the edge of Castle Rock and enclosing sev-eral large buildings that housed as many as 3,000 soldiers. Holy-roodhouse consisted of several chateaulike structures and aruined church, the complex surrounded by well-kept gardensand its own protective wall. High Street was paved with stoneand was very wide, especially near St. Giles and its courtyard.The boulevard was, and still is, known as the Royal Mile.
The final defining structure of Edinburgh was built in the
early 1500s, after Scotland’s army suffered tremendous losses atthe hands of the English in the disastrous battle of Flodden Fieldin 1513. Fearing that the now-defenseless capital would be coun-terattacked, Edinburgh’s leaders convinced every inhabitant toassist in building a defensive wall that would surround the city .The wall tracked down the ridge on either side of the Royal Mileand then closed off before Holyroodhouse. Though the FloddenW all was impressive—it reached heights of nearly 25 feet inplaces—it ultimately did little to protect Edinburgh. A genera-tion after the wall was built, in 1544, the English successfully49 AULD REEKIE

5 0 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME
broke through and razed most of the wood-and-thatch city .
However, this would be the last time large parts of the city wouldbe destroyed. The Scots would rebuild by using local sandstone,which greatly reduced the risk of fires. Though it failed to keepout the English invaders, the Flodden W all did serve as a tangi-ble boundary . From now on, Edinburgh would be confined tothe land within the wall.
Flodden W all was the final defining man-made structure of
Edinburgh. However, no description of the city would be com-plete without some mention of the natural forces at work. Mostof Scotland is blessed with an abundance of rain, and Edinburghis no different. The city built on Castle Rock receives rain fromthe North Sea and the Firth of Forth. These two bodies of wateralso create heavy fogs and high winds. The celebrated writerand Edinburgh native, Robert Louis Stevenson, left a marvelousdescription of the weather in his affectionate look at his home-town, Edinburgh, published in 1912:
But Edinburgh pays cruelly for her high seat with one of the
vilest climates under heaven. She is liable to be beaten uponby all the winds that blow , to be drenched with rain, to beburied in cold sea fogs out of the east, and powdered with thesnow as it comes flying southward from the Highland hills.The weather is raw and boisterous in winter, shifty and unge-nial in summer and a downright meteorological purgatory inthe spring....  F o r  a l l  w h o  l o v e  s h e l t e r  a n d  the blessings of
the sun, who hate dark weather and perpetual tilting against

51 AULD REEKIE
squalls, there could scarcely be found a more unhomely and
harassing place of residence.
Despite the inhospitable climate, Edinburgh’s defensibility ,
and proximity to good farmland and excellent ports, inevitably
made it one of Scotland’s commercial centers, and therefore acity that needed to grow . However, the citizens’ fear of buildingoutside Flodden W all ensured that expansion was held in check.Therefore, as did American builders in Manhattan centurieslater, the clever builders of Edinburgh looked to the sky for theonly open space. Because the city was confined to the spinelikeridge left by the glaciers, the foundations of the buildings alongthe Royal Mile were fragile and the tallest structures could notbe more than six or seven stories high. But because the demandfor space was so great, every building in Edinburgh was maxi-
mized and built to a height of six or seven stories. The buildingswere all attached to one another, like tall row houses. Y et, onlythe front façades were limited to seven stories. Because the landfell so sharply away from the ridge, the rears of these buildingsoften had an additional three or four basement stories. Thebasement levels were built right into the sandstone of the ridge.Visitors to San Francisco or Pittsburgh can see similar architec-ture to this day . 
As the population of the city grew , and as Flodden W all kept
all building activity within its interior, additional rows of buildingswere constructed behind the first ones. With land so precious, the

structures were built right on top of each other. Steep stairs, slop-
ing courtyards, and narrow alleys, called wynds, provided the only
paths to these new tenements. The old town maps from the six-teenth and seventeenth centuries look like mazes. High Streetremained one of the only wide streets in the city .
The tenements were called “lands,” and the way they were
inhabited reflected the city’s social structure. The ground floor wasusually a place of business for a merchant or tradesman. Directlyabove the ground floor were the owner’s personal quarters. Familymembers probably used one or two floors, depending on the sizeof the household. The servants and staff lived on the floors abovethe family quarters. And above the servants, on the top floors,would be the renters—most likely laborers such as textile workers.The lowest classes—the itinerant laborers who could find workonly occasionally , the unemployed, the crippled who could notwork at all, and the mentally ill—occupied the basement floors.
Though Edinburgh was always picturesque, with many citi-
zens having views of the Firth of Forth and the surrounding hills,the geological constraints made the city severely cramped byJames Hutton’s time. The smells and the pollution created by thecountless chimneys constantly belching smoke gave Edinburghthe disparaging moniker Auld Reekie. Moreover, the overcrowd-ing was exacerbated by yet one other characteristic of the city thatwas dictated by its natural history: Because the ridge on which itwas built prevented Edinburgh from having a plumbing system,an unusual system of waste removal evolved. Edward Burt, aLondoner who visited Edinburgh in 1754, left this vivid accountof the “system”:5 2 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

When I first came into the High-Street of that City , I thought
I had not seen any thing of the Kind more magnificent; theextreme Height of the Houses, which are, for the most Part,built with Stone, and well sashed; the Breadth and Length ofthe Street, and (it being dry W eather) a Cleanness made bythe high Winds, I was extremely pleased to find every Thinglook so unlike the Description of that T own, which had beengiven me by some of my Countrymen.
Being a Stranger, I was invited to sup at a T avern. The Cook
was too filthy an Object to be described, only another EnglishGentlemen whispered to me and said, he believed, if the Fellowwas to be thrown against the W all, he would stick to it. . . .
W e supped very plentifully , and drank good French
Claret, and were very merry till the Clock struck T en, theHour when every-body is at Liberty , by beat of the CityDrum, to throw their filth out of the Windows. Then theCompany began to light Pieces of Paper, and throw themupon the T able to smoke the Room, and, as I thought, to mixone bad Smell with another.
Being in my Retreat to pass through a long narrow
Wynde or Alley , to my new Lodgings, a Guide was assignedto me, who went before me to prevent my Disgrace, cryingout all the W ay , with a loud V oice, Hud your Haunde (holdyour hand). The opening up of a Sash, or otherwise openinga Window , made me tremble, while behind and before me, atsome little Distance, fell the terrible Shower.
W ell, I escaped all the Danger, and arrived, not only safe
and sound, but sweet and clean, at my new Quarters, but53 AULD REEKIE

when I was in Bed I was forced to hide my Head between the
Sheets, for the Smell of the Filth, thrown out by the Neighborson the Back-side of the House, came pouring into the Roomto such a Degree, I was almost poisoned with the Stench.
In the morning, the streets were cleaned, as much as possi-
ble, by work crews that had the nastiest jobs in the city , and the
regular rains also helped to freshen up the wynds and court-yards. However, the lowest parts of the city , especially near Flod-den W all, became highly polluted.
The overcrowding and poor sanitation were certainly prob-
lematic for Edinburgh. Y et, the city’s unusual layout, whichforced all residents to live close to one another, regardless ofrank and station, did have a highly positive effect. It required thecitizens of Edinburgh to be, if not egalitarian, at least tolerant.T o be sure, there was a class structure, with the rich living onthe more desirable floors of the lands and on the higher ground,but rich and poor alike had to dodge the “terrible showers”being thrown from the windows above. This spirit of inclusive-ness would later inform the Scottish Enlightenment and, byextension, Hutton’s work.
Though there is a great deal of information about Edinburgh
in the early eighteenth century , frustratingly few details remain
about James Hutton’s early life. W e do know that he was born onJune 3, 1726, to William Hutton, a merchant, and his wife, SarahBalfour Hutton. William passed away two years after James’sbirth, leaving Sarah a thirty-one-year-old widow responsible for5 4 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

raising five children on her own. James’s older and only brother
also died when he was young, leaving James the only male in ahousehold that now included his mother and three sisters. W edo not know the birth order of the Hutton children, but only onesister was still alive when Hutton died, so he was probably thenext to youngest of the five. There is no evidence that SarahHutton ever remarried.
William’s integrity was such that his fellow merchants
elected him to the office of city treasurer, a position that he heldfor some time. As treasurer, William had been an active partici-pant in the reinvigoration of a city that had suffered horribly inthe aftermath of the Darien Affair, the name historians now giveto the wholly private venture that nearly bankrupted the entirecountry . The affair began in 1698, a decade after the deposing ofJames II, the last Catholic king of England and Scotland, whenthe Edinburgh banker William Paterson convinced his fellowEdinburghers to try to colonize a part of Panama, the Isthmus ofDarien. Paterson knew that the narrow isthmus was destined tobe an important crossroads for world trade, and he planned tobuild a road across it, linked by ports on each side. This wouldhave been Scotland’s first colony . Paterson was a brilliant sales-man; by tapping into his countrymen’s ambitions, nationalism,and anti-English sentiment, he succeeded in persuading nearlyevery prominent citizen to contribute to the enterprise. Esti-mates vary , but it appears that Paterson raised nearly £400,000,approximately one-half of all the wealth that then existed inScotland. Though successful in Scotland, the attempted settle-ment in Panama was a disaster. Spain had its own claim to the55 AULD REEKIE

land, and her armed resistance, coupled with English obstruc-
tion and a devastating outbreak of yellow fever, caused the entirescheme to collapse tragically . Over 1,000 Scots died. T wo moreScottish expeditions were sent to their doom, the brutality of theSpanish increasing each time. After two years, three expeditions,the loss of five ships, the expenditure of over £200,000, and theloss of over 2,000 Scots lives, Paterson and the Scots finally gaveup. The Bank of Scotland, founded in 1695, never recoveredand declared bankruptcy at the end of 1704.
The collapse of the Darien venture, and the near bankrupt-
ing of Scotland, led directly to the Act of the Union with En glandin 1707. Though England and Scotland had professed loyalty toone king since 1603, the two countries had remained independ-ent, Scotland retaining its own parliament despite the Englishgovernment’s strong desire to unify . After the debacle of Darien,the English government agreed to pay Scotland’s debts; but inreturn, the leaders of Scotland would have to accept the union ofthe two countries. The Act of the Union forced Scotland into second-class status behind England, but the nation had nochoice. Its diminished standing manifested itself pri marily in for-eign trade—English merchants quickly dominated the Scottishtextile and fish trades. In these difficult years, William Huttonwas among the merchants who put Edinburgh back on its feetagain, reasserting the quality of Scottish wool, linens, spirits, andpaper in the Baltics and the Low Countries. By the year ofJames’s birth, the city of 30,000 was once again thriving.
In Edinburgh, another consequence of the Act of the Union
was the rise of the Whigs, a group of progressive businessmenand jurists who were eager to eliminate the excesses of anti-5 6 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

quated feudal and mercantile laws. William Hutton and his
 fellow merchants were staunch Whigs: largely Presbyterian,though not usually too devout, and descended from Lowlandfamilies having ties to England. The Lowlands were the landssouth of Edinburgh and Glasgow that over the centuries hadbeen settled by invading Normans and then English. The Jaco-bites (followers of James II, the Catholic monarch deposed in1688) had been the ruling class for centuries, and they weredeeply suspicious of the world envisioned by the Whigs. TheJacobites embraced tradition, believed in the divine right of themonarchy to rule, and were mainly Catholic. They sprang pri-marily from the clans, the Scottish equivalent of feudal landown-ing families, who dominated life in the Highlands, the regionnorth of Edinburgh and Glasgow that had been settled by theancient Scottish tribes pushed north by the Normans and En -glish. The rise of the Whigs in Edinburgh was catalyzed by theascendancy of William and Mary to the thrones of England andScotland (Mary was James II’s daughter, but she was Protestantand not the official heir to the throne). In accepting the crowns,William and Mary agreed to greatly reduced powers, a conditioninsisted upon by the Whig-dominated parliaments of Englandand Scotland. The Whigs’ consolidation of power was sealed bythe Act of Union, which eliminated the Scottish parliament inEdinburgh, the last vestige of Jacobite influence.
Considering the properties that James Hutton inherited, it
appears that William Hutton left his widow and children fairlywell off. Certainly , the Hutton children never lacked for food orcomfort. In all likelihood, William Hutton left his family in pos-session of land, and it was probably in the part of Edinburgh57 AULD REEKIE

known as Lawnmarket, where the wealthiest citizens lived. It
was located just below the castle at the highest part of the city ,where High Street was at its widest; the view of the Firth ofForth and the surrounding hills was spectacular. St. Giles, thecathedral from which John Knox led the Presbyterian Reforma-tion a century and a half before James Hutton’s birth, was a littlefarther down High Street. The open courtyard in front of thechurch would have been teaming with activity every day as mer-chants concluded deals and solicitors and judges, their officesnearby , discussed the issues of the day .
After the death of William, Sarah probably rented the
ground and perhaps the second floor to another merchant, or toa professional such as a solicitor. The Hutton family of five likelylived on the third floor. Most of the eighteenth-century lands arestanding today , so we have some idea what the Hutton homelooked like. The flat was most likely very comfortable and spa-cious, with enough rooms to allow for privacy for all five mem-bers of the Hutton family . The ceilings were quite high, perhaps12 feet, and the front parlor probably had two or three windowslooking onto High Street. The rear rooms may have had win-dows overlooking the courtyard in the back. The kitchen waslarge and the warmest room in the house; but there were fire-places in nearly every room, so they would all have been wellheated. Because of the active trade with the continent, Dutchtiles and cookery were common.
Young James was sent to the High School of Edinburgh,
located near the bottom of High Street, starting in 1736, when5 8 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

he was ten years old. He received the standard instruction of the
day , which consisted of courses in Latin, Greek, and mathemat-ics. Then, in November 1740, he entered the University of Edin-burgh. Hutton was only fourteen, but that was the normal age tobegin college at the time. David Hume, the philosopher, whowas fifteen years older than Hutton, was only eleven when hestarted at the same university .
By 1740, the University of Edinburgh was beginning its
ascent to greatness. Founded in 1583 as a divinity school duringthe early stages of the Presbyterian Reformation, it consisted ofa series of rather decrepit buildings separated by three court-yards. Student dormitories surrounded one courtyard (thoughmost students lived elsewhere in town). The library and admin-istrative offices enclosed the next one, and the largest courtyardfronted the classroom buildings and faculty offices. Though inneed of repair, the University of Edinburgh had an outstandingfaculty , making it probably the best of Scotland’s four universi-ties (Aberdeen, Glasgow , and St. Andrews were the others).
Hutton was one of approximately 500 students at the Uni-
versity of Edinburgh in the 1740s. The faculty was tiny , maybea dozen professors in all. Many fields of study that students nowtake for granted simply did not exist. There was no school ofengineering, no economics department, no chemistry depart-ment. There was a rigid curriculum, though. The first year wasdevoted to Latin, the second year to Greek. Logic and meta-physics, along with natural philosophy , were the focus of thethird and final year. Other than these four courses, there was buta handful of electives, which included ethics, mathematics, and59 AULD REEKIE

history . Students paid the lecturer a fee at the beginning of each
course. Though professors were paid a base salary by the uni-versity , they depended on these payments from the students tomake ends meet. Thus, a professor had a strong incentive todevelop a reputation as a fine speaker so that he could fill the lec-ture hall, and then his pockets.
It was at the University of Edinburgh that the teenage Hut-
ton was first introduced to the ideas of Isaac Newton, whichwould prove enormously important to his later work. A key tenetof Hutton’s theory of the earth was that it behaved like amachine, obeying constantly acting natural laws. This conceptwas drawn directly from Newton’s natural laws of universal grav-ity and celestial mechanics. Hutton was first exposed to Newtonin the natural philosophy course taught by Colin Maclaurin(1698–1746), one of the leading scholars on the faculty . As ayoung man, Maclaurin had worked with the aging Newton inLondon; Sir Isaac was so impressed with Maclaurin that in 1725he wrote two letters to the university on Maclaurin’s behalf, onea letter of recommendation, the other an offer to pay part of hissalary if necessary . Maclaurin, a prolific writer of books and apopular teacher, viewed himself as an apostle of Newton, andhe infused his natural philosophy lectures with heavy doses ofNewtonian science.
Hutton was fortunate to encounter Maclaurin during his
peak years, when he was particularly focused on bringing New-ton’s ideas to a wide audience. His greatest work, T reatise of
Fluxions (fluxion was the term Newton used for calculus) was
published in 1742, when Hutton was a student. This was a tech-6 0 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

nical work that bolstered various propositions from the Prin-
cipia (1687), Newton’s most famous book. At the time, Maclau-
rin was also working on a popular book that was published in
1748, two years after his premature death. Published under thetitle Sir Isaac Newton’s Philosophical Discoveries, it is still con-
sidered one of the clearest explications of Newton’s ideas—ideasthat would profoundly influence all the members of the ScottishEnlightenment. 
Newton made at least four seminal discoveries, described
collectively as the Newtonian Revolution, a term used even dur-
ing Newton’s lifetime. The first was in mathematics. Newtoninvented calculus (Leibnitz independently made the same dis-covery , and the two share joint credit for this still essential tool forscientific inquiry). He also discovered the properties of color,which led to his invention of the reflecting telescope, still in activeuse to this day . Sir Isaac’s third great work was the mathematicalsynthesis of the science of mechanics, in which he defined mass,motion, inertia, and momentum. The final and most famous washis discovery of universal gravitation, to this day one of the mostimportant scientific revelations of all time. Building on the workof Copernicus, Galileo, Brahe, Kepler, and Descartes, Newtonexplained how the planets, their moons, and comets maintainedtheir orbits around the sun. Universal gravitation also explainedthe mystery of tides, and how objects of different weights fall atthe same speed (one of Galileo’s important findings).
The Principle of Universal Gravitation was the first natural
law to be identified: It proved that any object with mass exertsa gravitational force, always, and that the planets maintain their61 AULD REEKIE

orbits at all times. Another important aspect of Newton’s work
was his insistence on using the scientific method: building the-ories by accurate observation, then verifying them through rig-orous yet repeatable experiments. His only nontechnical book,Opticks (1704), stressed the need for all scientists to follow
these guidelines.
Colin Maclaurin surveyed all of the above for James Hutton
and the rest of his classmates, hoping to imbue them with thesame excitement that he felt for Newton’s accomplishments.But Maclaurin had one other major effect on Hutton. Maclau-rin was a deist, one who believes in a creator God, a God whodesigned and built the universe and then set His creation intomotion (but does not interfere with the day-to-day workings ofthe system or the actions of people). The following passage isfrom Maclaurin’s 1748 book:
The plain argument for the existence of the Deity , obvious to
all and carrying irresistible conviction with it, is from the evi-dent contrivance and fitness of things for one another, whichwe meet with throughout all parts of the universe. There is noneed of nice or subtle reasonings in this matter: a manifestcontrivance immediately suggests a contriver ....  N o  p e r s o n ,
for example, that knows the principles of optics and the struc-ture of the eye, can believe that it was formed without skill int h a t  s c i e n c e ....  The admirable and beautiful structure of
things for final causes, exalt our idea of the Contriver: the
unity of design shows him to be One. The great motions in the
system, performed with the same facility as the least, suggest6 2 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

his Almighty Power, which give motion to the earth and the
celestial bodies, with equal ease to the minutest particles.
James Hutton would later use similar language in his own
written works. There seems little doubt that Hutton shared
Maclaurin’s religious perspective. Whether Maclaurin was theonly source of this belief system is not known, but it seems likelythat he had a significant impact.
John Stevenson was equally influential, albeit less directly .
Stevenson was a logician and he taught the third-year meta-physics course. In one of his class sessions, Stevenson alluded tothe fact that it takes two acids to dissolve gold, each acid usuallybeing powerful enough on its own to dissolve other metals. Thepoint of the metaphor was lost on young Hutton, but the chem-ical process described was not. Intrigued by the idea, Huttonwent in search of a book on chemistry (a course did not exist atthat time), and found the only general reference work available:Lexicon T echnicum. The chemistry described in this volume
was simple, but it nevertheless attracted Hutton. From this pointon, chemistry would be a singular love of Hutton’s, and it wouldbe a key tool in his later work.
Hutton graduated from the university in the spring of 1743.
If he distinguished himself academically during his three yearsthere, no record of it exists. It appears that Hutton passed hisyears there rather uneventfully , which is what one would expectgiven his young age—even the precocious David Hume gradu-ated from the University of Edinburgh at the age of fourteenwithout any of his professors noticing his presence among them.63 AULD REEKIE

Shortly after graduation, Hutton began an apprenticeship in
a solicitor’s office, a job most likely secured through his mother’s
connections. However, sitting in a dark back room copying willsand contracts by candlelight apparently did not offer Huttonenough stimulation; John Playfair relates that “the young man’spropensity to study continued, and he was often found amusinghimself and his fellow apprentices with chemical experiments,when he should have been copying papers, or studying the formsof legal proceedings.” Hutton’s mentor quickly realized that thelaw was not the career for James, and he “advised him to think ofsome employment better suited to his turn of mind.” By theautumn of 1744, Hutton was back at the university , this timeenrolled as a medical student. Since medicine was the only pro-fession of the day in which chemistry played a major role, med-ical school was the obvious next choice for the young man.
At this time, there is nothing to suggest that James Hutton
had any interest in what would soon preoccupy him for the restof his life: the earth. However, an unusual event occurred in thesummer of 1744 that may have had some effect on him. One day ,a particularly violent storm caused a landslide near the top ofArthur’s Seat, which is the large mound that shadows the citynear Holyrood Palace. There was no devastation or loss of lifebecause no one lived on this formation, but the landslide createda hollow , which today is called Gutted Haddie. Exposing a largepiece of the hard volcanic rock, the landslide demonstrated, in amost profound way , the power of erosion. It is almost certainthat Hutton, being of curious mind, was one of the many resi-dents of Edinburgh who went to observe the damage.6 4 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

Three key features mark James Hutton’s later scientific
work: his application of Newtonian natural laws to the study of
the earth, his innovative use of chemistry , and his recognition ofthe dynamics of erosion. By the summer of 1745, Hutton hadbeen exposed to all three. Maclaurin’s natural philosophycourse was one of the best introductions to Newtonian scienceavailable anywhere in Europe. Hutton was now studying medi-cine, giving him the most intense chemistry training available.And, too, he was living in Edinburgh, whose high winds, fre-quent rains, and eroding mountains, monuments, and tomb-stones offered daily instruction in the forces of nature.
In August 1745, the nineteen-year-old James Hutton had com-
pleted his first year of medical school and was idling away the
summer, waiting for his courses to resume in the fall. Theywould not begin on time. The grandson of James II, CharlesStuart, was about to lead a small army of clansmen from out ofthe western Highlands in a rebellion that no one could haveforeseen. The uprising would do more than interrupt Hutton’seducation; it would deeply affect every citizen of Edinburgh andfrighten the ruling Whig regime into recognizing the frailty of allthey had gained for themselves and the city since the Act ofUnion in 1707. New forces would align to shape the future ofEdinburgh, and with it, James Hutton’s career.65 AULD REEKIE

This page intentionally left blank 

4
The Storm Before the Calm
The present unhappy troubles . . .
David Hume, 1745
Except for one, they were all Macdonalds. All 150 of them.
Marching in a ragged column on the dirt road headed toward
the glen, this was the first time the brothers, cousins, and unclesof the sprawling Macdonald clan had seen each other fullyarmed. W earing the plaids of the clan, they carried an oddassortment of old blunderbusses, pistols, swords, and pikes,most of them handed down from their fathers and grandfathers.Those without guns and swords carried sharpened farm toolssuch as scythes and pitchforks. Across their hips, they each worea large bag in which they carried the provisions they would needto live in the field for two or three months.
Leading the column was the lone non-Macdonald, Charles
Edward Philip Casimir Stuart. Standing a head taller than all the
67

men, and dressed resplendently in a white coat saved for the
occasion, this handsome twenty-five-year-old would soon beknown to the world as Bonnie Prince Charlie. He was the reasonwhy this small ragtag army had left their homes to fight the gov-ernment; in the eyes of the Highland clans, Bonnie Prince Char-lie was the crown prince of Scotland.
Charles Stuart was the grandson of James II, the last Stuart
king of England and Scotland, and the son of the exiled JamesIII. Stuart and his family had lived in Rome ever since his grand-father had been forced off the thrones of England and Scotlandin 1688. Four weeks earlier, in July 1745, Charles had secretlysailed from France in a small frigate with only seven followers,and he landed in the western isles of Highland Scotland unan-nounced and unexpected. The prince and his confidants hadmade their plans clandestinely; no one, not even Charles’sfather, knew where he was. He had literally shown up on thedoorstep of the leaders of the clans and announced that now wasthe time to muster the clansmen, attack Edinburgh, and regainthe crown of Scotland for his father and eventually himself.
The prince had reason to believe that the Highland clans
would rally around him. T wice in the past sixty years, they hadformed armies to fight for the Stuarts. The first uprisingoccurred in 1689, soon after the Protestant- and  Whig-dominated English Parliament and the Scottish Estates Generalhad voted to oust James II and invite the Protestants William ofOrange and his wife Mary to wear the crowns. The firmlyCatholic Highlanders, certain that a Protestant monarchy wouldcause only more hardship for them, quickly rose in support of6 8 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

King James. They fought several bloody battles with the English
army before finally retreating to their Highland homes. The kingthen went into exile.
This chaotic episode was known as the first Jacobite Upris-
ing. A generation later, in 1715, the clans again took the field forthe Stuarts, this time for Charles’s father, James III (known as theOld Pretender to his detractors). With France’s Louis XIV sup-plying French troops and arms, the rebellion looked serious tothe English. However, bad weather and even worse coordinationconspired to doom the affair before fighting took place, and theclansmen melted back into the Highlands to wait for another day .
William Hutton and most of his fellow merchants in Edin-
burgh thought that 1715 marked the end of the Jacobite menace.However, Prince Charles, growing up in a household that talkedof little else besides the illegal usurpation of the Stuart crown, hadsimply been waiting his turn. He chose the summer of 1745 to actbecause most of the English army was not in the British Isles; theywere deeply engaged on the Continent, mired in the W ar of theAustrian Succession. England would react slowly at best to a dis-turbance in Scotland. But, unlike his father thirty years earlier,Charles was receiving no support from France. He was relyingcompletely on the loyalty and fighting ability of the Highlanders.
This had not been the case just a year earlier. Then the
French government had viewed Charles as a key player in whatthey hoped would be a huge British conflagration. The Frenchin tended to put Prince Charles back on English soil, backed bytheir own troops, to spur a Jacobite uprising. If all went accord-ing to plan, the French would place the Stuarts back on the69 THE STORM BEFORE THE CALM

throne of Great Britain, gaining a powerful ally while deposing a
nemesis. Even if the plan ultimately failed, they would at leastcreate a major distraction, and perhaps succeed in removing theBritish from French business on the Continent. It was wellworth risking the lives of 7,000 French soldiers. Unfortunatelyfor Charles, the fleet carrying the French troops was scattered bya prolonged storm, and they were never able to land. On theheels of this failure, a new set of ministers and generals gainedpower in France, and they had no further interest in the princeor a restored Stuart monarchy . Charles, his hopes raised so high,was now left to his own devices.
The well-worn road on which Prince Charles and the Mac-
donald clan were now traveling ran along the rocky and pictur-esque river Finnan and led to the vale of Glenfinnan. The valewas an open field bordered by tall trees at the spot where theFinnan flowed into Loch Shiel, a long, narrow lake surroundedby tall mountains. Charles had deliberately chosen this spot forthe first gathering of the clans; the idyllic highland scene wasmeant to inspire the highland sons on whom his quest depended.
The question was this: W ould there be anyone to rally?
Since arriving in the western isles four weeks earlier, Stuart’soriginal expectation of universal and enthusiastic support hadbeen met with disappointment. The very first clan leader he sum-moned refused to join the rebellion, thinking it too reckless with-out French support. The chief of the Macdonald clan was alsowary . The year 1715 was a long time ago, he told Charles, andwithout French backing a revolt made no sense. Still, Charles wasdetermined, and at last he won over the chief of the Cameron7 0 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

clan, who said that he would be able to deliver nearly 1,000 men.
With that, the Macdonalds reluctantly agreed to fight, too. Theprince then sent letters to the leaders of all of the clans that he hadnot met with personally , and the returning messengers assuredCharles that there was solid backing for his cause. So, bolsteredby the allegiance of the Camerons and Macdonalds, the positivereports from the returning messengers, and the unwavering con-fidence of the seven companions who had sailed with him fromFrance, Charles declared August 19 the day the fight to regainthe crown would begin. And it would begin here, at Glenfinnan.
The column reached the crest of the last small hill before the
woods opened to the vale, and when the prince marchedthrough the opening, there was . . . nothing. No horses, no can-non, no bagpipes, and no soldiers. No one save his seven fol-lowers from France, who had come ahead of him, and who nowstood near the lakeshore. The prince was completely bewil-dered. The Macdonalds entered the vale right behind him, andthe chatter stopped immediately . Crestfallen, the prince walkedacross the field by himself to the area near the water where sev-eral huts formed a tiny hamlet. He entered one of them to dealwith the shock and chagrin.
Nobody knew what to do. One of the prince’s confidants
went into the cottage to try to lift Charles’s spirits, but he cameout several minutes later looking glum. The Macdonalds scat-tered over the field, and it’s probable that most of them thoughtthey would be walking back to their farms the next day . Finally ,after an interminable wait of two hours, the group heard thesound of bagpipes in the distance. The music drew closer, and71 THE STORM BEFORE THE CALM

with their eyes trained on the hill near the entrance to the vale, the
Macdonalds saw first the heads, and then the bodies, of the hugeCameron clan. They were marching in two columns, and theirorder was impressive. They reached the field and kept marchingtoward the lake. The Macdonalds quickly got back into ranks, notwanting to be outdone. When Charles heard the bagpipes, hecame out of his refuge, and watched excitedly as the columnsadvanced. He assembled his seven followers and moved to thesmall knoll adjacent to the lake, whereupon the 800 Cameronsand the 150 Macdonalds formed a semicircle in front of theprince. There was nothing to be embarrassed about now .
Still, a prudent man would have taken measure of the situ-
ation and returned to France. Instead, and inexplicably , withonly 950 men before him, Charles instructed his  highest-ranking companion, a gentleman who called himself the Mar-quis of T uillibardine, to unfurl the standard of the Stuarts,which was a red, white, and blue silk flag, and read the declara-tion of war against “the Elector of Hanover,” a taunting refer-ence to George II, whose German House of Hanover now ruledEn gland and Scotland. The rebellion had begun.
Charles Stuart was charismatic, but he knew nothing about
leading an army . In the hours after the reading of the declaration
of war against King George, another 450 or so Highlandersmade their way to Glenfinnan before nightfall, creating a forcetotaling 1,400 men. George Murray , an experienced officer whohad seen a great deal of action in Europe as a mercenary , wasamong them. Murray was quickly designated as the military7 2 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

commander of the Highlanders. He and the other clan leaders
decided to march straight to Edinburgh. By moving quicklytoward their ultimate goal, they hoped to surprise the govern-ment forces. Other clansmen would no doubt join them duringtheir march.
Meanwhile, in Edinburgh, rumors began circulating in early
August that Charles had landed in western Scotland. No onebelieved them at first. But reliable intelligence finally arrivedfrom the west. General Jonathan Cope, the ranking military offi-cer in Edinburgh, was charged with outfitting an army and elim-inating the nuisance immediately . Though Cope had been in theking’s service for over two decades, he had seen little militaryaction. One commentator later pointed out that, “From thispoint onwards, [Cope’s] incapacity for high command showeditself flagrantly .” Cope, like everyone else in Edinburgh, was con-fident that Charles could not possibly raise a large body of clans-man, so the alarm was muted.
Not taking any chances, though, Cope decided to engage
the Highlanders as quickly as possible, before their ranks wereable to swell. Y et he was able to muster only 1,400 troops inEdinburgh because most British soldiers were on the Europeancontinent. Reluctant to wait for more men to arrive in the city ,and expecting that his forces would increase as they marchedthrough pro-government territories, Cope and the government’sarmy departed Edinburgh on August 22. Without either sideknowing the situation of the other, the two small but equal-sizedlegions began marching toward their first engagement on practi-cally the same day .73 THE STORM BEFORE THE CALM

That first encounter occurred about 50 miles from Edin-
burgh, at a mountain known as Corriearrick. Cope was prepar-
ing to engage the enemy there, when at the last moment hereceived faulty intelligence indicating that the Highland infantrywas much bigger than his. He disengaged and led his troopsnorth to Inverness, 160 miles from Edinburgh. This meant thatthe way was clear for Charles and the Highlanders to march intothe former capital.
When news of Cope’s shocking nonengagement reached
Edinburgh, the citizens realized that they had been left unpro-tected. A hastily called town meeting made it clear to all just howunprepared the city was. There were no troops to prevent thehighlanders from capturing the city , beyond the 600 elderly“soldiers” that Cope had left behind to guard the castle; the offi-cer in charge was eighty-five years old. At the meeting, themajority voted to do nothing, praying that the Highlanders hadno interest in destroying Edinburgh and fearful that their sons,if hastily assembled into a fighting force, would stand no chanceagainst the ferocious clansmen. In addition, some townsfolkexhibited a lackadaisical attitude that revealed their pro-Jacobiteleanings—clearly a larger number of Jacobites lived in Edin-burgh than the Whig majority realized.
However, two town leaders would not accept such acqui -
escence, and they announced that they would take it uponthemselves to raise volunteers and defend the city . One of theleaders was none other than Colin Maclaurin, Hutton’s profes-sor of  natural philosophy . The other was George Drummond(1687–1766), a past mayor (called the Lord Provost), who had7 4 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

founded the University of Edinburgh’s medical school in 1726,
the year of Hutton’s birth. T ogether, they enlisted 400 volun-teers to defend the city , mainly students from the university . It isunclear whether James Hutton was among them. He and hismother and sisters could have been at the family farm 40 milessoutheast of Edinburgh. In fact, many citizens of Edinburghwho had family in the country left the city when word of theHighlander threat first arrived.
On September 15, scouts in the countryside delivered the
news to the leaders of Edinburgh that Prince Charles and theHighlanders were only 8 miles away , half a day’s march. Maclau-rin and Drummond mustered the volunteers in the Lawnmarketarea, near the castle, and then Drummond led them down HighStreet to take up positions at the town gate at the bottom of theridge. Inexplicably , the crowd along the street, who were there,the volunteers surely assumed, to cheer them on, instead pep-pered them with jeers and catcalls. In the face of this antago-nism, the fragile resolve of the young men disappeared. One byone, the volunteers quietly left the ranks and melted into thecrowd. By the time Drummond reached the town gate, therewere perhaps a dozen boys left. His army had become a brigade.This is when he gave up—furious with his fellow citizens—andlet the last of the students go home.
The next day , an advance troop of Highlanders entered the
city through the town gate unopposed. They quickly marched upHigh Street and secured the rest of the town. Not a shot was fired,and there were no casualties. The 600-strong garrison locked itselfin the castle, and remained there for the rest of the occupation.75 THE STORM BEFORE THE CALM

Then, on September 17, Prince Charles Edward Stuart, son
of James III and grandson of the last Stuart king to reign in Great
Britain, entered the city and took up residence at the Palace ofHolyroodhouse, the very spot from which his predecessors hadruled Scotland. Without losing even one soldier, and in just eightweeks from his arrival in the Highlands accompanied by onlyseven friends, the prince had taken over the capital of Scotland.
Charles, Murray , and the clan chiefs knew that Cope and his
army would appear soon. After retreating to Inverness, Copehad marched his 1,400 men east to the port of Aberdeen. Therethey boarded several naval ships and sailed down the coast andacross the mouth of the Firth of Forth to the town of Dunbar,which was about 30 miles east of Edinburgh. Cope was nowmarching toward the capital. But, in occupying Edinburgh,Charles had a major advantage: He could choose where theinevitable battle would be fought. George Murray did not wantto face the government soldiers in the city itself, so he chose afield near the town of Preston, just to the east of the city , as thespot for the encounter. Cope’s army would be marching throughPreston on the way to Edinburgh. The night before the expectedconfrontation, the clansmen vacated Edinburgh to take up theirpositions.
The accepted method of battle in the mid-eighteenth cen-
tury was for the two infantries to face each other on an open field,get off one round of musket fire (neither side had cannons), andthen charge each other with swords and pikes. This practice hadbarely changed for hundreds of years. The Highlanders, espe-cially those from the Cameron clan, used a particularly nasty7 6 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

weapon for want of guns: a sharpened scythe, which was a long
pole with a curved blade attached. Farmers used this tool for har-vesting, but in battle it was an opponent’s nightmare. If a High-lander got off a solid stroke of the scythe at close range, he couldquite literally cut an enemy in half.
The battle of Preston lasted only thirty minutes. The sol-
diers awoke on the morning of the expected engagement to findthemselves in a thick fog, a common occurrence in this area sonear the Firth. The fog allowed the Highlanders to begin theattack before Cope’s troops were completely ready . Eyewit-nesses of the battle, and there were many , describe a gruesomeencounter. The clansmen were able to reach government linesquickly , wielding their heavy swords and scythes ferociously .They sent Cope’s men into flight, but not before there wasawful bloodshed on the battlefield. One eyewitness describesan almost unimaginable scene, the field strewn with sliced-offlegs, arms, hands, and even heads and torsos. Those who lostan appendage lay bleeding to death, probably in silence due toshock. Others were screaming, trying to keep their entrails fromspilling out onto the field. There was so much blood on theground that it appeared as if a red rain had fallen. One govern-ment soldier had raised his arm to block a Highlander’s razor-sharp broadsword, which then cut off his hand before slicinghalfway through his skull.
Even Charles was appalled by what he saw; in a letter to his
father, he described the horror of watching so many youngmen, all his countrymen, horribly butchered. Approximately500 government soldiers were killed, and most of the rest were77 THE STORM BEFORE THE CALM

taken prisoner. Cope’s army no longer existed. The High-
landers, by comparison, had suffered fewer than three dozencasualties.
With the victory at Preston, the prince was now the undis-
puted leader of Scotland. Now what? Realistically , no one hadexpected Charles to get this far. But here he was in possession ofEdinburgh, a solid army was still intact, and he had plenty offood, money , and able advisors. Murray and the leaders of theclans advised the prince to be content with the capture of Scot-land and to prepare to defend Edinburgh and Scotland from theEnglish forces that would eventually come from the south. Butthe prince believed that England was also part of his legacy , andhe insisted that his men march into England, too. Murray andthe clan chiefs reluctantly agreed, acknowledging that perhapsthe best defense against counterattack was to move aggressivelyagainst their southern neighbor.
They would not do so immediately . It made sense to wait
and allow more Highlanders to join the force already in Edin-burgh. They also wanted to see whether the mercurial Frenchgovernment would change its mind and send support. In just afew weeks, the Highland army swelled to about 5,000 men. Inaddition to soldiers, Jacobite supporters who were not expectedto fight—older men, women, and children—came from the sur-rounding countryside to be part of the new Stuart regime.Reports of the period are fascinating. Charles held court andbehaved like a monarch, holding at least one royal ball and evenannouncing several edicts. His demeanor, though, was said to bemodest and controlled. The most humorous accounts focus on7 8 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

the behavior of the young women in the city , primarily the
daughters of Jacobite supporters. They apparently fawned overthe young and handsome prince.
The respite did not last. Unable to wait any longer to hear
from the French, in early November the army of Bonnie PrinceCharlie was once more on the move, heading south into En -gland. They would need to reach London before the heavy rainsof winter commenced. Just as  on their march from Glenfinnanto Edinburgh, the Highlanders met almost no resistance forhundreds of miles. On November 9, they took the town ofCarlisle, just across the Scots/English border. By early Decem-ber, the army had reached Derby , over 200 miles south of Edin-burgh, and only 130 miles away from London. The Highlandersappeared unstoppable.
However, Charles’s ultimate success depended on two fac-
tors. First, he needed the Catholics and Jacobites of England tojoin his standard and swell the ranks of his army of 5,000.Instead, they offered no support at all, either out of indifferenceor certainty that the prince’s effort was folly . Second, he des-perately needed the help of the recalcitrant French. Impressedby what Charles had accomplished, the French at this pointwere, in fact, hurriedly trying to form a small expeditionaryforce, but it would be several weeks before it would arrive, andthen it would be too little too late. On December 4, 1745,Charles and Murray met with the rest of the clan leaders todecide their next step. They knew from firm intelligence that anEnglish force of around 30,000 men, six times their size, was onthe march from London. The Highlander chiefs voted to retreat79 THE STORM BEFORE THE CALM

back to Scotland. Charles argued vehemently to continue to
London, but he bitterly caved in when Murray , whose leader-ship had been so impressive, voted with the rest of the High-landers. The beginning of the retreat was the beginning of theend, not only for the Stuart cause, but for old Scotland as well.
Murray , who kept the ranks together and moving quickly ,
handled the retreat masterfully . They crossed back into Scotlandin early January . Several days later, the Highlanders fought theirsecond battle against government forces, this time at Falkirk. Ina driving winter rainstorm, the clansmen once again chased thebetter-trained government troops from the field. The High-landers could not take much from the victory , however. Theycould not go back to Edinburgh because a new governmentarmy , formed in Glasgow , had retaken and secured the city just afew days before.
The English army was getting reinforcements from the
south daily . The Highlander army , on the other hand, was losingmen to desertion at a steady rate. The clansmen had been in thefield for six months now , and the winter weather, coupled withthe realization that England had now made the Highlanders’defeat a high priority , made it harder and harder to keep all butthe most committed fighting. Therefore, the retreat continued tothe historic capital of Highland Scotland: Inverness. BonniePrince Charlie and his men remained there for the rest of thewinter, preparing for the showdown with the government forcesthey knew would come with the beginning of spring.
The engagement occurred in early April 1746. Murray and
Charles made the decision to meet the enemy at Culloden Moor,8 0 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

just outside Inverness. The battle pitted the Highland force of
about 4,000 against a foe at least double that size.
More crucially , the government army now possessed numer-
ous cannons. The battle began in the early afternoon, andthough the Highlanders fought valiantly , it was over quickly . Inless than an hour, over 1,200 clansmen lay dead or dying onCulloden Moor. The order was given to retreat. Though thelosses were severe, Charlie’s army was still basically intact.
What happened next, though, was unexpected, and com-
pletely foreign to the rules of war. T o this day , it is rememberedby all Scots. When it was clear that Murray’s men were inretreat, the commander of the government forces, the duke ofCumberland (who was the younger brother of King George II,and therefore had a personal stake in the destruction of the Jacobites), ordered his soldiers to spare no one, not even thewounded lying in the fields and woods. “No quarter” wasthe order given. Hundreds of the fallen were shot or stabbedwhere they lay . Some were even buried alive. Many of the cap-tured were shot on the spot. Those who were not killed werethrown into prisons.
After the butchering of the Highlander army at Culloden,
the atrocity continued. Cumberland, with the complicity of thegovernment in London, had decided that a repeat of this rebel-lion must never occur. He was going to “pacify” the Highlandsonce and for all. Several days after the battle of Culloden, thegovernment army scattered throughout the Highlands, bringingdestruction in their wake. Cattle and sheep were slaughtered,crops ravaged. Cottages, farms, and houses were burned in every81 THE STORM BEFORE THE CALM

district of the Highlands. The lands of the fallen clan chiefs were
forfeited and turned over to special managers from the Low-lands. Laws were quickly passed that stripped the chiefs of allauthority . Clan councils were declared illegal, as was the wearingof tartans, the playing of pipes, even the mere speaking of Gaelic.The “harrying of the glens,” as the pacification came to beknown, was thorough, cruel, and brutal. Butcher Cumberlandwas singularly successful in ensuring that the clans would neverrise again.
Bonnie Prince Charlie escaped to the western islands of Scot-
land and then to the Continent, where he lived out the rest of his
long and besotted life (he died in 1788). For the bonnie prince,“the 45” was a bitter disappointment, yet he was able to resumehis privileged life in exile upon his return to Italy . W ould that theclans could have returned to their former lives. The viciousreprisals against them forever changed the landscape of Scot-land. The clans never recovered, and Highland culture becamejust a memory . Even Lowland Scots realized that something waslost with the passing of the clans. But what was lost in their eyesdid not outweigh what was gained—the elimination of the fearand wariness caused by the Highlanders and their violent andmartial culture, their arbitrary and antiquated laws, and the gen-uine risk of real conflict. The 45 was the third major armedencounter in as many generations. A modern society , which theWhigs were trying to create, could not achieve its full potentialwith this sword of Damocles hanging over its head. So, althoughEdinburgh’s Whigs did not approve of the way the Highlanders8 2 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

were quelled by the English government and army , they were
pleased with the result—the end of the specter of violence. Anenergy and determination fell over the city that laid the ground-work for an extraordinary intellectual flourishing a generationlater, one of the leading participants of which would be the nowsomewhat aimless student, James Hutton.83 THE STORM BEFORE THE CALM

This page intentionally left blank 

5
Y outhful Wanderings
But, happily , the force of genius cannot always be controlled 
by the plans of a narrow and shortsighted prudence.
John Playfair, 1805
W hen Bonnie Prince Charlie and his troops left Edin-
burgh on November 3, 1745, to begin their march on England,
they left only a small force of 500 men to maintain Jacobitecontrol. T wo months later, while Charles’s forces were boggeddown near Stirling Castle, English soldiers retook Edinburgh,forcing the remaining Highlanders to flee without firing ashot. One of the first official acts of the royal army was to findArchibald Stewart, the Lord Provost, and throw him intoprison. Stewart was accused of aiding and abetting the enemybecause he had presided over the meeting in which the townleaders had voted to do nothing to stop the rebels. GeorgeDrummond, the fifty-nine-year-old former Lord Provost and
85

one of the two city leaders who had mobilized to defend Edin-
burgh against the clansmen, was installed in his place. TheWhig-Jacobite tension that had simmered below the surfaceprior to “the 45” could no longer be ignored. The defeatedJacobites, like Stewart, were now stripped of all influence.
The confusion and uncertainty that existed in Edinburgh in
1746 were mirrored in James Hutton’s life. For the next eightyears, he would bounce from one enterprise and location to thenext, but fortunately all the while adding to his storehouse of sci-entific knowledge.
In the winter of 1746, with the Highlanders no longer walk-
ing the streets and drinking in the taverns, the citizens of Edin-
burgh tried to resume some semblance of normalcy . The battleof Culloden would not occur for a few more months, so therewas still tremendous unease in the city and throughout Scot-land. James Hutton would do his part to get on with life byresuming his medical studies.
The university was founded in the late 1500s and was
among the oldest in Great Britain, but the medical school wasquite new; it was founded by George Drummond the year Hut-ton was born. Drummond had high ambitions for the town, andhe viewed the University of Edinburgh as an institution thatcould have a positive influence on other parts of the city . At thetime, there was no medical school in Scotland, so any youngScot wanting to become a doctor had to study on the Continent,or else declare himself an Anglican and try to gain admittance toOxford or Cambridge. This situation was absurd in Drum-8 6 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

mond’s eyes, so he pressured the administrators of the univer-
sity to hire Alexander Monro as the first professor of anatomy;Monro, in turn, hired four additional faculty members. Drum-mond next forced the city council to approve the building ofEdinburgh’s first infirmary . His vision was for the two new insti-tutions to be integrated, and the medical school quickly becameknown for requiring its students to work bedside with sickpatients immediately after they began their instruction.
If Drummond saw the need for the integration of theory and
practice, in Alexander Monro he had the ideal scholar to makethis vision a reality . Monro and the other four original facultymembers had studied medicine under Hermann Boerhaave(1668–1738) at the University of Leyden, in Holland. Boer-haave is recognized as the first modern medical doctor in W est-ern history , for he stressed the need to observe directly , todiagnose, and then to treat patients in an era when “doctors”usually kept a safe distance from their patients. A gifted writerand lecturer, Boerhaave attracted many to Leyden and made itthe center of medical training in Europe. The curriculum hecreated wove together strands of anatomy , physiology , chem-istry , and pathology . Postmortems were made routine, whichwas a major innovation. As a follower of Newton’s, Boerhaavealso looked for general laws about the systematic operation ofthe body and the progress of disease within it. Monro broughtthis sensibility with him to Edinburgh, and the new medicalschool was modeled on Leyden’s. Thus, any student enrolled inEdinburgh’s medical school when Hutton was there wouldhave received intense instruction in anatomy , chemistry , and87 YOUTHFUL WANDERINGS

Newtonian  science, along with an appreciation for the impor-
tance of direct observation over slavish adherence to theory .
The medical students were practically buzzing with antici-
pation at the end of 1747. The popular professor of physiology ,John Rutherford, was about to begin clinical lectures in the infir-mary’s operating room. This development represented a signif-icant departure from past practices and was eagerly awaited bythe students. However, instead of participating, Hutton left forParis, where he continued his medical studies at the 700-year-old University of Paris. John Playfair rationalized Hutton’saction by pointing out that the medical school in Edinburgh wasstill not established as a world-class institution, so it was com-mon for students to finish their studies on the Continent. Still, itis more likely that Hutton left Edinburgh not because the med-ical school was deficient but because he was advised againststaying. Sometime in 1747, it seems, Hutton impregnated ayoung woman. No one, except perhaps for Hutton’s family ,knew about the illegitimate child until after Hutton’s death.
In E. C. Mossner’s standard biography of David Hume,
there is a marvelous passage about how illegitimacy was dealtwith in the eighteenth century . Apparently , David Hume’s ownfather, Joseph, impregnated a young servant girl when he wastwenty-one, the same age as Hutton when his indiscretionoccurred. The young woman, Elspeth Burnett, who was a ser-vant to Joseph’s uncle, testified before a church committee thatshe was with child in March 1702, and she claimed that JosephHume was the father. Joseph took his time about appearingbefore the same committee. When he finally showed up in8 8 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

August (the baby probably had been born by then), he simply
denied the accusation. With barely a pause, he announced thathe had to leave for Utrecht, in Holland, and off he went. No onetried to stop him. He did, in fact, go to the University of Utrechtto study law , and he stayed in Holland for the next three years.Mossner points out that young men in Joseph Hume’s positionwere usually recommended by family members to leave townand stay away for a while until the “affair” was forgotten. It islikely that the Hume family paid the girl a modest amount ofmoney and made a contribution to the church poor box. Thenthe matter was dropped, and “the scandal would probably nothave damaged his own good name irreparably .” By leaving Edin-burgh for Paris, Hutton appears to have been doing what anyyoung man in his situation would have done.
Hutton remained in Paris, where he “pursued with great
ardour the studies of chemistry and anatomy ,” according to Play-fair, for a little over a year. The University of Paris was among theoldest in Europe. The date of its founding is ob scure, but it was aformal institution of higher learning from the eleventh century on,and its medical school was probably the oldest in Europe. Pariswould have been incredibly exciting, both culturally and aes -thetically , for the young Hutton. The gardens, the cafes, the wideboulevards were already a feature of the city , thanks to the longand prosperous reign of Louis XIV (1643–1715), and the openspaces would have been a  welcome departure from Edinburgh’snarrow wynds and generally overcrowded conditions. The un restthat would lead to the French Revolution two generations laterwas not yet openly manifesting itself. Rather, this was the Paris of89 YOUTHFUL WANDERINGS

Montesquieu, Diderot, V oltaire, and the young Rousseau—the
height of the French Enlightenment.
Given Hutton’s pronounced interest in chemistry , it is
quite possible that he attended several of the riveting lecturesgiven throughout the year by Guillaume-François Rouelle(1703–1770), a chemist at the Jardin du Roi. Scholars at theJardin were obligated to teach public courses, which wereadvertised and well attended. Rouelle was reputed to be agifted public speaker with a showman’s style, particularlywhen it came to demonstrating chemical experiments. AntoineLavoisier, the father of modern chemistry , was said to havebeen inspired by him. Rouelle had a fascination with the chem-ical makeup and structure of the earth’s surface, and gave atleast one lecture on the subject.
After his year in Paris, James Hutton packed up once again
and moved to Leyden, in Holland, where many Scots finishedtheir medical schooling. Not even ten years since Boerhaave’sdeath, the medical school was still the finest in Europe. Leyden,though much smaller than Paris, was a vibrant city with a thriv-ing textile trade. Leyden was only thirty miles from Amsterdam,where Dutch culture was enjoying its zenith.
In September 1749, after five years of study , James Hutton
finally received his medical degree. His University of Leydenthesis was titled De sanguine et circulatione in microcosmo (TheBlood and the Circulation of the Microcosm). This thesis was
significant because it made use of Newton’s notion of cycles (asseen in the orbits of the planets) in analyzing the circulatorysystem, which is what allows the human body to be  self-9 0 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

sustaining. Hutton would later think about the earth in much
the same way .
In the fall of 1749, six years after having failed as a solicitor’s
apprentice, James Hutton was finally ready to begin a career. He
had a degree from the best medical school in Europe and hadstudied at two other outstanding institutions. With nearly adecade of schooling behind him, he had received the finest avail-able instruction in chemistry , by way of the study of medicine,and had been imbued with Newtonian thinking, thanks to ColinMaclaurin. His medical training had also honed his observationskills. But instead of going back to Edinburgh to begin a medicalpractice, he moved to London. Perhaps he wanted to avoid Edin-burgh because of his illegitimate son. Or perhaps the oppositewas true—he was helping the mother of his son establish herselfin London (the boy was known to have spent most of his lifethere). Whatever the reason, we know that from his residencein London, Hutton wrote to his friends in Edinburgh andexpressed concern that it would be difficult to start a medicalpractice back home. Y et he did not try to begin a practice in Lon-don, either. In fact, after all the years of preparation, there is noevidence that he ever seriously considered practicing medicine.
One of the acquaintances to whom Hutton wrote was a for-
mer classmate named James Davie. Hutton and Davie hadworked on chemistry experiments together during their schoolyears. As students, they had found a way to make the chemicalsal ammoniac, which was used as a flux in metalworking (toconnect two pieces of metal). Davie and Hutton had discovered91 YOUTHFUL WANDERINGS

how to make the flux from common coal soot, an abundant sub-
stance in any northern city of the age. Thus, the expense for rawmaterials was essentially nothing—one merely paid chimneysweeps a few trifles for soot. Moreover, at the time, the onlyavailable sal ammoniac came from Egypt (where it was madefrom camel dung). Davie wrote to Hutton suggesting that per-haps they should try to sell sal ammoniac by using theirmethod. Hutton left London for Edinburgh a few months later,in the summer of 1750, and worked with Davie to set up thechemical works. No details of the business arrangement exist,but it appears that Davie made Hutton a partial partner at thistime; Hutton was made a full partner in 1765. The men loyallyadhered to the arrangement for the rest of their days. The firmwas an immediate success, and it provided Hutton with asteady income; this, combined with his inheritance, made himfinancially comfortable.
The sal ammoniac work is the first tangible evidence that
Hutton was an unusually gifted and original chemist. It was hisknowledge of chemistry that separated him from most of theother early geologists and allowed him to produce such an orig-inal theory . Many scientists understood Newton’s teachings, andmany also were keen observers of the natural world, but few earlystudents of the earth had the gift of chemistry . In the next stageof his life, Hutton would continue to pursue his chemistry exper-iments while starting to pay attention to geological processes. Itis possible that the success he and Davie had in isolating animportant chemical from a mineral source—soot being a by-product of coal—helped to combine these two passions.9 2 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

Not much is known about the specifics of Hutton’s life in the
early 1750s, but clearly these were critical years. First, he made the
decision not to pursue a career in medicine. Then, James Davieappeared seemingly out of thin air to provide him with financialsecurity . And finally , after several visits to his farm (which he hadinherited from his father) some 40 miles southeast of Edinburgh,he made the decision to devote himself to farming. Given thatHutton had spent his life in cities, this was an enormous change,but it was key for his future scientific work. He would start think-ing deeply about the land he farmed, which would help prove histheory about the ancient earth over three decades later.
If Hutton was going to be a farmer, he wanted to be a modern,
innovative one. But he quickly learned how difficult that would be.
At this time, agricultural practices in Scotland were very back-ward, having changed little over hundreds of years. In 1752, prob-ably on the advice of John Hall, an influential friend who lived nearhis farm and who was the future father of James Hall, James Hut-ton made yet one more move. Certain parts of England wereknown for their agricultural innovations, and one of those areaswas Norfolk, a county north and east of London. Hutton per-suaded a farmer named John Dybold to let him live and work onhis farm for a short time. That “short time” stretched to two years.
These were happy and instructive years for Hutton. As John
Playfair later wrote: 
He appears, indeed, to have enjoyed this situation very
much: the simple and plain character of the society with93 YOUTHFUL WANDERINGS

which he mingled, suited well with his own, and the peasants
of Norfolk would find nothing in the stranger to set them at adistance from him, or to make them treat him with reserve. Itwas always true of Dr. Hutton, that to an ordinary man heappeared to be an ordinary man, possessing a little morespirit and liveliness, perhaps, than is usual to meet with.These circumstances made his residence in Norfolk greatlyto his mind, and there was accordingly no period of his life towhich he more frequently alluded, in conversation with hisfriends; often describing, with singular vivacity , the ruralsports and little adventures, which, in the intervals of labour,formed the amusement of their society .
During his tenure in Norfolk, James Hutton started thinking
about the earth in a rigorous way . He traveled extensively around
England, and later the Continent, observing farming methodsand geology . In a letter to John Hall, Hutton revealed that dur-
ing his hikes he found himself examining the surface of theearth, and looking in every pit, ditch, or bed of river that fell inhis path. He would continue making field excursions for the restof his life; he could later claim to have seen practically every cor-ner of England and Scotland.
The study of the earth was in its infancy in the mid-1700s—
the term geology would not come into use for another generation.
Indeed, the first chapter of the Book of Genesis stated precisely
how the earth had been created, so for most Christians there wasno need to inquire further. Y et, for the scientific community ,9 4 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

alive with activity since Galileo’s and Descartes’s work of the
early seventeenth century , numerous questions about the earthneeded to be answered. For example, how did a volcano work,what caused earthquakes, and what were those objects thatlooked like organisms mineralized into stone (that we today callfossils)? Notably , though, all early studies of the earth attemptedto be scientifically rigorous while still deferring to the time scaledictated by the Bible, and stressed the central role of Noah’sFlood and the waters of the newly created earth.
If Hutton had told one of his old professors at the Univer-
sity of Edinburgh of his newfound interest in the earth, and thenasked him for a list of the key books in the field, the professorwould likely have recommended nine works, all of which werepopular or influential at one time. They fell into two groups, thefirst being investigations of specific earth processes (e.g., earth-quakes), the other being all-encompassing “cosmogonies” thatattempted to understand everything—how the earth was cre-
ated, how it evolved, how it was going to end, and so forth. Thissmall library encapsulated geologic thought, circa 1752.
Hutton would have been directed to begin with Nicolaus
Steno’s (1631–1687) Dissertation Concerning a Solid Body
Enclosed by the Process of Nature Within a Solid, published in
Italy in 1669. This book made two important strides, and is nowwidely regarded as the first rigorous work in modern geology .First, it properly identified a fossil as a once-living organism thathad died on freshly deposited sediments, was buried by moresediments, and was then petrified (before Steno’s pronounce-ment, fossils were thought to be “figured stones”—minerals that95 YOUTHFUL WANDERINGS

through pure happenstance formed in shapes that resembled
organisms). Second, the work carefully and correctly describedhow sedimentary rocks formed. Steno realized that all sedimentsaccumulate in horizontal layers at the bottoms of bodies of waterand that the bottom layer of a sedimentary rock formation musthave formed before any of the layers on top of it. Like Huttonlater, Steno realized that the rock record he studied did notmatch well with the standard interpretation of the Bible, yet hewas not prepared to jettison the Scriptures, as Hutton was.Instead, he devised a scheme of six stages that explained hisobservations while still keeping the earth under 6,000 years old.He believed that after Noah’s Flood, a second cataclysm musthave occurred, in Italy at least, to account for the formations hesaw there. Hutton probably read the 1671 English translation ofSteno by William Oldham, a distinguished member of the RoyalSociety who viewed the work as seminal.
The next crucial book for a newly inspired student of the
earth would have been Robert Hooke’s posthumously pub-lished Discourse of Earthquakes (1705). Hooke (1635–1703)
was an extraordinarily talented and influential scientist, secondonly to Newton in late seventeenth-century England. He con-curred with Steno’s description of how fossils formed, and sug-gested that violent upheavals, such as earthquakes, had raisedundersea sediments above sea level in the past, which was cor-rect. However, as it was for Steno, Hook’s earth was only as oldas the Bible allowed.
After Steno on fossils and sediments, and Hooke on earth-
quakes, Hutton would have been urged to read Anton-Lazzaro9 6 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

Moro (1687–1740) on volcanoes. His De’ crostacei was pub-
lished in V enice in 1740. Though it demonstrated an impressive
understanding of the power of volcanic action and observed thatlava came from deep within the earth, the overall theory was stillstrongly tied to the Book of Genesis.
The other six books were all cosmogonies, their authors
attempting complete histories of the earth (Hutton would laterstrongly object to this type of effort). The first three scholars, allfrom England, started a tradition that was later called “biblicalgeology ,” that is, the effort to link scientific laws to biblical his-tory . The most ambitious book was Thomas Burnet’s The
Sacred Theory of the Earth, published in four volumes from1681 to 1689. As the title implies, Burnet’s work treated theHoly Scriptures as the starting point. It was a long, very compli-cated book that sought to explain the evolution of earth in thecontext of Newton’s laws while adhering strictly to the Bible. Inastounding detail, Burnet explained how the earth started out asa paradise with a mild climate everywhere, only to be distortedby the great Flood. He continued by projecting what the futureheld for the earth, and predicted that a planet-engulfing firewould send us all to a fiery death. Burnet was part of the Englishscientific establishment, Edmund Halley and Isaac Newtonbeing close friends. Just as Newton’s chronology helped to keepbiblical chronology viable for another century , his assistance andendorsement of Burnet’s book helped to keep the study of theearth wedded to that chronology . Newton and Burnet had alengthy correspondence over two trouble spots in the book.Burnet wanted to, and ultimately did, start his book with the97 YOUTHFUL WANDERINGS

Flood, and then go back to the newly created earth. Newton, on
the other hand, believed that the starting point should be Cre-ation itself because he thought Noah’s Flood only further dis-torted what had already existed. And Newton thought thatBurnet’s trouble with just six twenty-four-hour periods for Cre-ation could be solved by supposing that the earth had rotatedmore slowly in the past (therefore a day was longer than twenty-four hours). Remarkably , Newton was prepared to compromiseon the natural laws that he had discovered.
John W oodward’s Essay T oward a Natural History of the
Earth was published in 1695. Inspired by Steno’s recognition of
the true nature of fossils, W oodward was particularly eager toexplain the remarkably wide distribution of them around theworld. He argued that the Deluge destroyed the original surfaceof the earth and, in the process, caused the scattering of livingcreatures that were later found preserved as fossils.
William Whiston’s New Theory of the Earth (1696) was
written in the same spirit as Burnet’s, but he worked harder tocome up with scientific explanations for known phenomena. Forexample, he pronounced that the Deluge was caused by a colli-sion of the earth with a comet. Invoking comet collisions waspopular at the time because a remarkable comet had been visiblein England and Europe for most of 1680.
After the appearance of these important works at the end of
the seventeenth century and the beginning of the eighteenth,there was a quiet spell that was broken right before Hutton’smove to his farm. Within a couple of years of each other, threedistinguished works were published. The first was the posthu-9 8 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

mous publication of Leibnitz’s (1646–1716) Protoggea, pub-
lished in 1749. T aking a cue from René Descartes, Leibnitz was
the first to propose an idea that would remain popular for therest of the century and would cause great frustration for JamesHutton: a universal ocean. The universal ocean was a differentconcept from Noah’s Flood, yet it was a variation on the sametheme. Leibnitz argued that soon after the earth formed, it wascovered by a great sea that eventually dissipated to reveal thealready-complex continents.
Another posthumously published book, Benoit de Maillet’s
(1656–1738) T elliamed (the author’s last name spelled back-
ward, 1748), was actually the first to propose that the earth wasancient—about 2 billion years old in the author’s estimation.Maillet also envisioned an earth once completely submerged bya universal ocean, and he calculated the 2 billion years based onhis analysis of how fast the waters were receding into vortices.The book went through three editions in French and at least onein English. Though a popular read, in the end Maillet’s sciencewas unpersuasive. This was because the book was supposedlywritten by an Oriental philosopher and based on Egyptian leg-end (Maillet probably chose this format to avoid the censure ofthe church), and it contained several wild claims; for example, itproposed that all species of organisms began as seeds (foundthroughout the universe), and that women and men had beentransformed from mermaids and mermen.
However, Maillet’s work did inspire the last important book
of the period, G. L. de Buffon’s thirty-four-volume Histoire
Naturelle (1749). Buffon was the Intendant of the Jardin du Roi99 YOUTHFUL WANDERINGS

in Paris, an influential position. In his widely read volume about
the earth, Buffon argued that it and all the planets had formedafter a collision between the sun and a comet or comets. Theearth therefore started out as extraordinarily hot. Over time, anocean formed that engulfed the entire planet (another universalocean), and the recession of the waters led to the composition ofthe land now inhabited.
In January 1751, a couple of years after the publication of
his ambitious work, Buffon received a letter from the faculty ofthe Sorbonne. The missive informed him that they had foundfourteen ideas in his volumes that were “reprehensible and con-trary to the creed of the church.” The key offending lines werethese: “The waters of the sea have produced the mountains andvalleys of the land—the water of the heaven, reducing all to alevel, will at last deliver the whole land over to the sea, and thesea, successively prevailing over the land, will leave dry new con-tinents like those which we inhabit.” Apparently , the faculty dis-approved of Buffon’s implication that God did not create themountains and valleys directly; rather they were the result ofsecondary causes—the waters of the sea.
T o keep his prestigious position, Buffon had to recant: “I
declare that I had no intention to contradict the text of Scripture;that I believe most firmly all therein related about the creation,both as to order of time and matter of fact; and I abandon everything in my book respecting the formation of the earth, and ingeneral all which may be contrary to the narration of Moses.”
Clearly , as Hutton began his earnest inquiries into the earth
in 1752, the field was still deeply influenced by the Book of Gen-1 0 0 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

esis. The extraordinary hold of the Bible prevented genuine
freethinking about the history and workings of the planet, andthe few open-minded scientists who did emerge were quicklycensured by the church. Though Steno, Leibnitz, and Buffonwere skeptical about the earth being only 6,000 years old, theydid not openly confront the issue.
1Only Maillet published an
argument for an ancient earth, but because the author wasalready dead, and the flaws of his book were so pronounced, theclaim had almost no power. There was really only one truly sem-inal and lasting work from which Hutton could build his owntheory , and that was Steno’s. He would certainly use it as a start-ing point. In time, he would build a remarkable edifice on thatfoundation.101 YOUTHFUL WANDERINGS
1Buffon would later revise his book and state that the earth was 75,000 years
old. He arrived at this number through experiments that he conducted to estimate
the cooling rate of the earth. The revision was less influential than the original,though, because when it was published in 1778, geologists were already under theinfluence of Abraham W erner’s theory . Also, several of the assumptions of Buf-fon’s hypothesis were no longer believed valid thirty years later.

This page intentionally left blank 

6
The Paradox of the Soil
At last he fixed on his own farm in Berwickshire, and accordingly 
set about bringing it into order with great vigour and effect.
John Playfair, 1805
In the summer of 1754, after spending two years learning
about farming and husbandry with John Dybold in Norfolk, the
peripatetic James Hutton began a period that could not havebeen more settled. For the next thirteen years he resided at hisfarm, called Slighhouses, and visited Edinburgh only occasion-ally . Initially unsure of his decision to become a farmer, he soondevoted all his energies to farming and related scientific experi-ments. This was unquestionably the most creative period of Hut-ton’s life, comparable to Charles Darwin’s five years aboard theBeagle. When he packed up for Edinburgh in 1767, James Hut-
ton was recognized as one of the leading mineralogists in Scot-land, and he had quietly begun forming his theory of the earth.
103

Ironically , erosion, evident in so many parts of Scotland and
the essential starting point for Hutton’s theory , is not very obvi-
ous in the region around Slighhouses. It is a testament to Hut-ton’s skills of observation that he properly assessed its power notby watching storm waves decimate the North Sea coast but bywatching his soil wash away .
Slighhouses was located in the part of Scotland known as
the Borders. The name reflected the history; the countrysidebordered England and had changed hands many times in thepast. Even before there was an England or a Scotland, the areawas battled over by the Romans and the Picts. Hutton’s land wasnot even 10 miles north of the border with England. The farmwas situated in a section of the Borders known as the Merse, anancient term that some believe means marsh, as the  low-lyingarea may well once have been. The Merse consists of essentiallyflat land with gently rolling hills, which, like the hills of Edin-burgh, were underlaid by the products of volcanic activity hun-dreds of millions of years ago. The numerous streams andcreeks, called burns and waters respectively , flowing eastward to
the North Sea helped to make the Merse one of the best farmingregions in Scotland.
The area reminds an observer of southwest England, the
region that Thomas Hardy wrote about, and the patterns of agri-cultural life in this part of Scotland in the eighteenth century weresimilar to those of Hardy’s Dorset and Devon. The spring plantingseason and the fall harvest were intensely busy times, but the sum-mer growing season and the dreary winters, during which therewas little to do besides feed the animals, dominated. The farmswere widely separated, and it was common to see no one but your1 0 4 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

own farmhands for days on end. Markets were held but once a
week, and even then one saw only the same faces week after weekin this sparsely populated area. Only the major holidays wouldhave drawn out the boisterous crowds. The overall rhythm of liferequired a major adjustment for the urban born and bred Hutton.
The topography of the Borders was nothing like that of the
spectacularly rugged Highlands of northern Scotland, or even of
the bumpy land surrounding Edinburgh and the Firth of Forth.But what the region lacked in dramatic features it made up for invistas. Slighhouses itself was on gently sloping land, the fieldsrising toward the north. The elevation gave Hutton an uninter-rupted view of vivid green fields for miles to the south, literallyright from the stoop of his front door.
On a clear day , Hutton could stand at that door and look to
the southeast across 12 miles of farmland and almost see thelargest city in his region, Berwick (pronounced “Berick”), wherethe T weed River runs into the North Sea. Berwick was foughtover many times by the English and Scots, and in Hutton’s dayit was the northernmost city in England, as it remains today . Itwas a walled town during the medieval period, when it was Scot-land’s chief port. Because it was such an inviting target when-ever the English and Scots were at war with one another,Berwick eventually lost its status as a key commercial hub. Bythe mid-1700s, though, having been unthreatened for genera-tions, it was once again thriving and served as the chief port fornorthern England and southern Scotland. The streets of thetown flowed downhill from the protective walls to the northbank of the wide T weed. There were no village greens or parks105 THE PARADOX OF THE SOIL

to distract its 8,000 inhabitants from business. Y et, right before
Hutton took up residence at his farm, the city had finished con-structing a new town hall; this building immediately served asthe main meeting place during market days. It seems likely thatJames Hutton came to Berwick whenever he needed to buy orship anything substantial, such as new farm equipment.
The only other town of consequence was the southernmost
Scottish port, Eyemouth, which lay about 9 miles east of Sligh-houses and 8 miles north of Berwick. It got its name from thestream called the Eye W ater, which flowed into the North Searight in town. Eyemouth was much smaller than Berwick, andnot nearly as active a port, but being Scottish, it was perhaps amore hospitable place for Hutton.
The rest of the Borders consisted almost wholly of various
farms. The few towns, connected to one another by narrow dirtroads, were tiny , merely collections of a dozen or so sturdy homes.T wo deserve specific mention. Just 5 miles from Slighhouses, andclearly visible from Hutton’s front door, was Chirnside. Thisquaint village was built atop a 400-foot-high ridge, one street run-ning east to west along the ridge, and the other one droppingstraight downhill and south to the parish church, or kirk, below .The church was the largest in the district, parts of it dating fromthe twelfth century , and it was the closest to Slighhouses. Thelarge public house, in the middle of town at the top of the ridge,would have been the center of activity on market days.
The other town that was part of Hutton’s world was Duns,
a market town only about 4 miles as the crow flies, and 6 milesby road, to the southwest of Slighhouses. Hutton later told his1 0 6 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

friends that his farm was near Duns, so this was most likely the
town he viewed as home. Duns was very old, dating from thethirteenth century , and was built up around Duns Castle. Thenoble who founded the town maintained a large woods for hunt-ing, and the forest around Duns to this day remains one of thefew in southern Scotland, so intensively farmed is the land.
Though Hutton traveled to each of these villages and towns
and did business in them, he spent the vast majority of his time
on his farm. Slighhouses became Hutton property in 1713,when John Hutton, James’s uncle, bought the 140-acre farmfrom a John Renton. William Hutton acquired it in 1718.
The grounds sloped up gently from south to north, the low-
est point being about 300 feet above sea level, the highest about450 feet. The house was situated in the middle of the tract. Thenorthern border of the farm was on the edge of an upland; thesouthern border descended in the direction of the White AdderW ater, a creek that formed the southern boundary of the neigh-boring farm. The White Adder is one of the main tributaries ofthe T weed River, which it joined 3 miles from Berwick. Hutton’sland was blessed with plenty of flowing water. There was Lint-law Burn, Fosterland Burn, and at least five other streams thatdid not rate names. Evidence of Scotland’s violent past wasfound nearby . About a mile from the house, in the upland, werethe ruins of a small castle, called Bunkle Castle. Beyond theruins were the remains of an ancient earthworks and castle,probably built by the Romans during their brief occupation ofthis part of Scotland in the first century 
A.D.107 THE PARADOX OF THE SOIL

Hutton’s house (which is still standing) was a standard two-
story building with a slate roof—what today we call a Colonial.
The main structure was built in the early 1700s, either by Ren-ton or one of the Hutton brothers, and they had probably addedon to an even older dwelling. The house had a very sturdy exte-rior, with what today looks like a stucco coating made of sandand pebbles. Hutton’s home consisted of a bottom floor withtwo rooms, a parlor and the kitchen/eating area, and a secondfloor with two rooms, one being the bedroom. There was onesimple entrance, a recessed, unadorned narrow door, and therewere windows in the front and rear of each of the four rooms. Asfar as we know , Hutton lived all thirteen years at Slighhouses byhimself, though he may have had a servant or two.
A second piece of property was also part of the Hutton
holdings. In 1710, eight years before he bought Slighhouses,William Hutton purchased what is now called a hill farm.Named Nether Monynut, it consisted of 590 acres, a huge tract.Located in the Lammermuir Hills and reaching heights of 1,000feet above sea level, this rocky , hilly land was never meant forcultivation; it was intended for grazing cattle and sheep. The hillfarm was located about 8 miles northwest of Slighhouses, fol-lowing a path alongside a creek called the Monynut W ater. Hut-ton probably kept many of his cattle and sheep there most of thetime, and then once a year herded some to Slighhouses to be fat-tened up and then sold at market.
We know that James took his time before finally settling at
Slighhouses in 1754, a full five years after he finished his med-1 0 8 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

ical degree at the University of Leyden. T wo letters written by
Hutton to two friends in 1755, only a year after his arrival, sug-gest that he was very unhappy , perhaps living there under someform of coercion. In one he states: “This squeamish homebredstomach of mine an’t truly reconciled to the bitter pill o’ disap-pointment.” There is a hint in these letters that he was heartbro-ken over the end of a relationship, which may have affected themood and tone of the letters. T o George Clerk-Maxwell(1715–1784; whose great-great grandson would be JamesClerk-Maxwell, the discoverer of electromagnetism) he wrote, “Idon’t let any of the fair kind of creatures know of my distress; itwould kittle the malicious corner of their hearts to hear theafflictions of a hardened wretch whom they could never make togroan.” In the same letter he went on to say , “O if the ladies werebut capable of loving us men with half the affection that I havetoward the cows and calfies that happen to be under my nurtureand admonition, what a happy world we should have!” In thesecond extant letter, this one to his lawyer in Edinburgh, JohnBell, he alludes to no longer being socially active: “They had meat a feast of Baal in Eyemouth where was an honest sow roastedi’ the gut so we had a dish of surprised pig and I did eat thereof;they led me up into the dance, but I will enter no more into theirhigh places.”
These are the only letters that remain from Hutton’s years at
Slighhouses, but it appears that shortly after they were penned,Hutton shook off his ill temper and became quite focused on thework at hand. He became an extraordinarily industrious farmerwith a penchant for conducting experiments.109 THE PARADOX OF THE SOIL

This was a period of rapid agricultural innovation in many
parts of Europe, especially in England, and Hutton was deter-
mined to bring the lessons he had learned there to his nativeScotland. He was remembered in the Borders region for intro-ducing several new methods, which were then widely copied.First, he stopped using the traditional—and backbreaking—form of tillage, which was called run-rig. Run-rigs were high,
straight mounds that were dug with the heavy and cumbersomeScots plough. They could be from 10 to 20 feet wide and severalhundred yards long. The practice had begun hundreds of yearsearlier to provide drainage and to protect the crops from heavyrains. But the method was counterproductive; by loosening andthen exposing so much soil to the elements, the losses to erosionwere extraordinary . Instead of creating run-rigs, Hutton firstenclosed his fields with low stone walls, and then addeddrainage ditches.
Hutton’s second innovation was his use of a radically differ-
ent plow , the Suffolk plough, which he had seen used during hisstay in Norfolk. A Suffolk plough, light and well designed, wasequipped with steel blades and required just two horses har-nessed abreast to pull, and but one man to control. The Scotsplough, used throughout Scotland at the time, was large, heavy ,and made completely of wood. It required a team of at least sixhorses or oxen, and three men to handle. There is evidence thatHutton invited his neighbors to his fields to watch the newplough in action in the hope that they would be as impressed ashe had been. Indeed, they were, and within a few years, Suffolkploughs were in wide use in the Borders.1 1 0 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

Hutton’s method of crop rotation was also original and
highly refined, and it, too, was copied by his neighbors. He
rotated wheat, turnips, and barley , in that order. The turnipswere planted late, in May , allowing that field to lie fallow for sixmonths after harvest. When a field was lying fallow , he wouldgraze cattle on it, for both the manure (a fertilizer) and the clean-ing of crop waste that the animals ensured by their constant eat-ing. The grasses with which he covered his turnip and barleyfields kept a devastating turnip parasite at bay and made the bar-ley field ready for grazing cattle immediately after harvest.Finally , Hutton was reputed to have kept his fields remarkablywell weeded and clear, not because he was unusually neat, butbecause he realized that a clean field was best for the crops.
In addition to farming, the other main activity at Sligh-
houses was the raising of cattle and sheep. Though he slaugh-tered some cattle for beef, Hutton was more interested in thedairy goods they provided. In fact, one of the first things he didafter arriving at Slighhouses was to build a dairy shed for the ani-mals. The sheep, of course, provided meat and wool.
The wheat, turnips, barley , cattle, and sheep ensured one
more thing at the farm—the presence of other people. Shortlyafter settling in the Borders, Hutton went to Suffolk to recruit aplowman, who resided with him for several years. The plowmansupervised several farmworkers, most of whom probably lived incottages on the farm. These were the farmhands who handled thedaily chores of taking care of the animals and maintaining theequipment. During the spring planting season and fall harvest,dozens of extra workers from the surrounding towns would have111 THE PARADOX OF THE SOIL

been hired. In addition, the sheep would have required as many as
twenty shearers during shearing season, which was in late spring.Most of the shearers probably lived in Chirnside and Duns, andthey went from farm to farm performing their services.
James Hutton succeeded in turning his farm into a modern
one, a model for the region. By the late 1750s, the hard work ofrestructuring the farm was finished. Hutton might have slacked off,but instead went to work on experiments that he had started soonafter settling at Slighhouses. Using some of his sheds as labs, heinvestigated all kinds of problems that afflicted Scottish farmers. T oassess the role of light and darkness on crops, he grew plants withcalibrated amounts of sunshine. Organic and inorganic fertilizerswere also the focus of his attention. One of his experiments dealtwith isolating calcium carbonate in marl, an impure form of lime-stone, in an effort to help farmers put alkali into their fields and soimprove the fertility of the soil. He also developed methods toeradicate smut, a devastating crop disease common in wet climates.
Though Hutton was immersed in the business of agriculture
after his arrival in the Borders region, he clearly found time to pur-sue his geological and mineralogical interests, too. In 1764, heaccompanied his friend George Clerk-Maxwell on a tour of theHighlands. Clerk-Maxwell was a member of the Commission forthe Forfeited Annexed Estates. The government had formed thiscommission to assess and then sell the land confiscated from theclan chiefs following the rebellion of Bonnie Prince Charlie. Nowknown as a skilled mineralogist, Hutton’s role was to help Clerk-Maxwell calculate the value of the land, both for farming potentialand for its mineral holdings. The twosome made an arch across1 1 2 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

the Highlands, moving from west to east (visiting Creiff, Dalwhin-
nie, Fort Augustus, Inverness, East-Ross, Caithness, Aberdeen,then back to Edinburgh).
This trip marked the first time that Hutton had seen the
Highlands. An area of spectacular beauty , its high rugged moun-tains formed backdrops for lochs and waterways of all types.Hutton would have viewed what is now called the Great GlenFault, the unique, arrow-straight line of thin lakes that marks theboundary between the upper Highlands and the central High-lands. For someone recently interested in the study of the earth,this trip to the Highlands would have been inspiring indeed.
John Playfair, in his Life of Dr. Hutton, muses that “it would
be desirable to trace the progress on an author’s mind in the for-
mation of a system where so many new and enlarged views ofnature occur, and where so much originality is displayed. Onthis subject, however, Dr. Hutton’s papers do not afford somuch information as might be wished for, though somethingmay be learnt from a few sketches of an Essay on the NaturalHistory of the Earth, evidently written at a very early period, andintended, it would seem, for parts of an extensive work.” Theessay that Playfair refers to represents Hutton’s first musings onhis theory . It was probably written immediately after the 1764excursion, although it has unfortunately been lost.
The two key tenets found in Hutton’s essay were, one, that
most rocks are made up of eroded material (that is, sedimentaryrocks) and, two, that all surfaces on the earth are subject to con-stant erosion. As Playfair stated, “They were neither of them,113 THE PARADOX OF THE SOIL

even at that time, entirely new propositions, though in the con-
duct of the investigation, and in the use made of them, a greatdeal of originality was displayed.” It was seeing the two sides oferosion, and perceiving that they represented a cycle, that madeHutton’s realization important and seminal. According to Play-fair, who used expressions reflecting his and Hutton’s belief in asupreme deity , Hutton understood “that, as the present conti-nents are composed from the waste of more ancient land, so,from the destruction of them, future continents may be destinedto arise....  T h u s  h e  arrived at the new and sublime conclusion,which represents nature as having provided for a constant suc-cession of land on the surface of the earth, according to a planhaving no natural termination, but calculated to endure as longas those beneficent purposes, for which the whole is destined,shall continue to exist.” As Playfair makes clear, in this earlyessay , dating from the mid-1760s, Hutton was already arguingthat the earth was ancient, and that it would continue with itscycle of destruction and rejuvenation until the Creator Himselfbrought the mechanism to an end.
Stephen Jay Gould has referred to Hutton’s realization as
“the paradox of the soil.” Erosion is necessary to form soil, a keyto the survival of all humans, but it also destroys the very soilthat it has formed. Without a mechanism for its restoration, theland would quickly become uninhabitable, which the deist Hut-ton believed a benevolent Creator-God would not allow .
The irresistible question is this: When did James Hutton, this
clever farmer, start developing his theory of the earth, however1 1 4 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

 fitfully? The answer is that we do not know; Hutton kept no diary ,
and the sparse correspondence that survives makes no mention ofa starting point. W e do know that Hutton was paying attention tominerals and rock formations during his stay in Norfolk.
One source of insight into erosion, in addition to his disap-
pearing soil, may have been the ruins of Bunkle Castle and the oldRoman earthworks near his house. The 500-year-old foundationstones of the castle would have been transformed into smooth,rounded protrusions by the Scottish rains and wind. The earthenwalls of the Roman structure would have been even more severelydamaged. Hutton recognized that even though erosion was con-stantly occurring, it nonetheless operated quite slowly .
As for sedimentary rocks, they were all around him. W e
know that one of the first things that Hutton did at Slighhouseswas to enclose his fields with low stone walls. “A cursed countrywhere one has to shape everything out of a block & to blockeverything out of a rock ....  I  f ind myself already more than half
transformed in to a brute,” he wrote in 1755. Because he workedon the land day after day , there would have been no other timeduring which he handled rocks so intensively . At the same timehe was gathering and stacking sandstone blocks, he would havebeen noticing his soil leeching away and ending up in thenumerous streams on his property . W atching the fast-flowingwater wash his soil downstream, Hutton would have imaginedthe journey from Lintlaw Creek to the White Adder, whichflowed into the T weed, which then emptied into the North Sea.Perhaps this freethinker took note. Perhaps he realized that theerosion he saw on his land every day put grains of dirt and sand115 THE PARADOX OF THE SOIL

into streams, which flowed into rivers, which then flowed into
seas, where the grains settled to become sediments, whichwould eventually become sedimentary rocks. And he was thefirst to realize that these future sedimentary rocks would one daybecome new dry land and replace the fields he was currentlyfarming.
In 1767, his farm in good order and his theory of the earth
beginning to coalesce, James Hutton packed his bags onceagain, and finally headed back to Edinburgh. Unbeknownst tohim, he was going back to participate in one of the most remark-able periods of intellectual discovery to have occured in oneplace in the W estern world.1 1 6 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

7
The Athens of the North
No place in the world can pretend to competition with Edinburgh.
Thomas Jefferson, 1789
The Edinburgh to which James Hutton returned in late
1767 was quite different from the one he had abandoned twenty
years earlier to continue his studies in Paris. Most of the changescould be traced back to the rebellion of Bonnie Prince Charlie in1745–1746 and its aftermath. Also, they were chiefly the director indirect work of one man, Lord Provost George Drummond,who died at the age of seventy-nine the year before Hutton’sreturn, after having led the city for twenty years. Drummond hadco-organized the defense of Edinburgh, along with ColinMaclaurin, in September 1745, when it became clear that thegovernment’s soldiers would not return in time to protect thecity . He was appalled by the cowardice shown by his fellow citi-zens and incensed by the manifestation of rampant Jacobism.
117

When he was made Lord Provost in early 1746, he did not rest
until all Jacobite supporters were essentially run out of town,either through moral suasion or imprisonment (for aiding andabetting an enemy). While the Duke of Cumberland was “harry-ing the glens” and eliminating Jacobism in the Highlands,Drummond was harrying Edinburgh with essentially the samegoal, though the rule of law prevailed. The purging of the Jaco-bites largely drove the old aristocracy from the city so that what-ever class distinctions had once existed were now gone.Edinburgh became dominated by pro-business, pro-union (withEngland) Whigs—progressive merchants, solicitors, local gov-ernment officials, and scholars.
A similar process was taking place in the Presbyterian
Church, spurred by a faction known as the Moderate Party . Ledby William Robertson, historian and soon-to-be principal of theuniversity , the Moderates represented a wing of the church thatsaw “industry , knowledge, and humanity linked together by anindissoluble chain.” They believed that it was possible to har-monize the goals of the Whigs and a modern commercial societywith those of the church. The leaders were young ministers,many of whom had been part of Drummond and Maclaurin’sstudent brigade.
Thus, in the years after the 45, the city saw many tensions
evaporate. The Jacobite threat was over forever, which meantthat Scotland would never again have to worry about armedaggression; future wars would be England’s concern. A largeportion of the city’s population, now about 50,000, shared thesame basic attitudes toward commerce and progress. And the1 1 8 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

previously strict and conservative Presbyterian Church became
more tolerant, especially toward the goals of the Whigs.
George Drummond also strove to further improve the uni-
versity and medical school, two institutions that he doted on likea parent. Thanks to his care, by 1767 the most able professorsfrom Scotland’s other universities had been lured away fromtheir home schools and hired by one of Edinburgh’s. As a result,both were now superior institutions, attracting students from allover Europe and making Edinburgh a Mecca for scholars. Thiswas particularly true for the sciences. The spirit of Newton andMaclaurin was maintained by Matthew Stewart, one of thebrightest mathematicians in Britain. The two leading chemistryprofessors in Scotland, William Cullen and Joseph Black, hadbeen brought from the University of Glasgow . Learned socialclubs, of which only a few had existed before 1745, were nowubiquitous, giving scholars a place to congregate and discussideas nearly every day .
All these positive developments led to continued population
growth. Realizing that the physical constraints of the 600-year-old city hampered its ability to absorb more people, Drummondhad finally convinced Edinburgh’s leaders to break out of theancient confines and construct a completely new section. Called,originally enough, the New T own, this jewel of urban planningwould be built to the north, between the old town and the portof Leith. When finished, it would provide the residents with allthe space they would ever need, and would allow Edinburgh togrow to its natural size, no longer trapped behind the FloddenW all. The final design was officially accepted in the spring of119 THE ATHENS OF THE NORTH

1767, and construction had begun just as Hutton moved back
that fall. The plan called for the filling in of Nor’ Loch, the man-made lake at the north base of Castle Rock, which served as amoat in the earliest days, and was now an open cesspool. Drum-mond’s singular vision would be a complete departure from theold town—laid out as a grid, it would feature dozens of widestreets and two large parks.
There was one other notable development, which was less
tangible than the stones and mortar of New T own, but signifi-cant nonetheless. Edinburgh had just produced its first gen-uinely world-famous personality , the philosopher and historianDavid Hume (1711–1776). Born and educated in Edinburgh,Hume wrote his most important book of philosophy before thisperiod; the massive A T reatise of Human Nature was published
in 1739–1740. The main theme of Hume’s philosophy—an ideathat would eventually embed itself into the culture of late eighteenth-century Europe and North America—was thathumans were largely controlled by their passions, not theirrationally trained minds, and that this was natural and thereforegood. “Reason is, and ought to be, the slave of the passions,” hewrote. Thousands of years of religious and philosophicalthought, from the Greeks to Rousseau, had sought to elevatehuman beings above the beasts of the jungle because of their reason and their ability to overcome base passions. Hume essen-tially said that humans were still beasts. Moreover, he argued,only by accepting the reality that humans are motivated by  self-interest and passions would governments be able to createproper and effective civil institutions. Hume was also an avowed1 2 0 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

atheist and critical of all religions, mainly because they sought to
curb human passions. T o Hume’s chagrin, his T reatise, written
over ten years, went largely unread, at least initially .
Hume was not present in Edinburgh during the 45, but he
became galvanized by it all the same, and soon after decided towrite a history of the Stuarts. T aking advantage of his positionas Keeper of the Advocates Library , the finest collection ofbooks and documents in Edinburgh, Hume ultimately wrote a six-volume history of England and Scotland, published from1754 to 1762. He used it to demonstrate how the human race,motivated by passions and self-interests, could still experienceprogress. The History of England became a best-seller—it
would go through multiple editions over the next fifteen years—and made him a wealthy man. Hume went from living modestlyto spending lavishly . He took advantage of his success and reis-sued many of his philosophy books, which now became widelyrecognized as profoundly important works. They , too, soldwell. Collectively , these publications sought to create a “scienceof man” derived from Newtonian principles and applied tohuman behavior. Hume’s ideas would exert a great deal of influ-ence on Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, and the rest ofthe founding fathers of the United States.
A naturally social man, Hume had openly sought fame and
celebrity all his life, and now he finally had it. From 1763 to1766, Hume was the secretary and then chargé d’affaires at theBritish embassy in Paris. He became the toast of the town,befriending Denis Diderot, Jean d’Alembert, and Jean-JacquesRousseau. The British government transferred him to London121 THE ATHENS OF THE NORTH

in 1767, where he served as the undersecretary of state for the
next two years. Then, in 1769 and at the age of fifty-eight, DavidHume retired to Edinburgh, where he would be the de factoleader of the scholarly community until his death in 1776.
In the two decades of James Hutton’s absence, Edinburgh
had metamorphosed from a medieval city to one of the mostmodern in Europe. In 1767, it was squarely on the map of pro-gressive Europe and no longer a backwater town in a lawlesscountry known only for its inhospitable climate.
Another factor that contributed to the energy in Edinburgh
was the thriving economy of the city and the country as a whole.
The textile, fishing, and banking industries had each experi-enced recent productive innovations. And there were expecta-tions for even greater prosperity now that construction wasabout to begin on the Forth and Clyde Canal, the water passagethat would connect the Firth of Forth with the Firth of Clyde,and thus the twin cities of Scotland: Edinburgh and Glasgow .
The canal was among the reasons why James Hutton
returned to Edinburgh when he did. Canal building was the ragein mid-eighteenth-century Europe, as new tools, techniques,and materials finally allowed for the long-desired connectionsbetween large commercial centers. Though the Forth and Clydewas not the first canal in the British Isles, at a planned 38 mileslong it was among the most ambitious. Surveying had begun in1762, and the actual digging would begin in June 1768 (thecanal would be completed in 1790). An organization called theForth and Clyde Navigation Company had parliamentary con-1 2 2 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

sent to supervise the enterprise, and it appointed a Scottish
committee of management to oversee the construction. Thecommittee consisted of nine men, one being George Clerk-Maxwell, with whom Hutton had toured the Highlands in 1764.Maxwell wanted Hutton on the canal committee for the samereason he had wanted him to examine the forfeited Highlandestates—he was a talented mineralogist and the canal committeewould constantly be facing such geological issues as determin-ing the ideal path along which to cut the canal, deciding on theproper prices to pay for land, and choosing the quarries thatwould supply the needed materials.
Hutton became a member of the canal’s committee of nine
in the last part of 1767, and he stayed on until 1775. By then thecommittee, which was originally based in Edinburgh, hadmoved to Glasgow , since the main construction of the canal wasnow nearing the Clyde. The records of the canal company indi-cate that Hutton attended over eighty often-lengthy meetings inseven years, and that he was heavily engaged in day-to-day deci-sions in the early years of his participation. Being able to observemuch of the actual digging added to Hutton’s already extraordi-nary knowledge of the geology of Scotland.
James Hutton’s involvement in the construction of the Forth
and Clyde Canal was the only formal obligation he would have
for the rest of his life. He likely remained involved with theDavie/Hutton Sal Ammoniac chemical works because in 1765the partnership was formalized, but there is no indication that hehad any essential responsibilities or that he spent much time123 THE ATHENS OF THE NORTH

there (although he did have materials sent to him at the chemical
works address). Indeed, Hutton had no need to work. He re -turned to Edinburgh a wealthy man (he was among the originalinvestors in the canal, having paid 500 pounds to acquire fiveshares). Moreover, he would continue to collect a steady streamof income from the Davie/Hutton works, from Slighhouses,which he rented out, and from various properties in Edinburgh:“The rents, mails, and duties . . . of the houses, shops and othersin the T own of Edinburgh pertaining and belonging to me.”
Hutton remained single, so he had no family obligations (it
appears that he sent money to his son in London, but there is noevidence that he ever saw him). He did, however, live with histhree sisters, who never married, in the house that he built in1770. It is probable that his mother was now deceased, other-wise she would have moved in with him, too. A detailed descrip-tion of the house was left by a relative of Hutton’s, Sir JamesCrichton-Browne (1840–1938), who was born in the houseforty-three years after Hutton’s death:
(The house) was (in) a picturesque corner of Old Edinburgh.
It stood on a ridge about 120 feet above the south back of theCanongate, and was a cul de sac, approached from St.Leonards by a narrow pathway and a curious old arched pas-sage, and from the south back of the Canongate by a longflight of broad but much dilapidated steps. There were onlyseven or eight houses in St. John’s Hill, each detached andstanding in its own bit of ground, and shadowed by its owntrees. The house at St. John’s Hill, standing back from the1 2 4 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

road, and overshadowed by trees, was approached by a gate-
way and a short walk, and was very much like the houses ofthe well-to-do in Edinburgh in those days. On the right, onentering, was a long dining room, rarely used, to the left, asmall parlour that was the family rendezvous, and upstairsthere was a long fusty drawing-room, only opened on stateoccasions, and a number of bedrooms, all stiffly furnished,and with four-poster beds. At the back of the house was agreen on which we putted.
When Hutton lived there, at least one of the rooms served as
his laboratory . Soon after the house was built, a visitor wrote:
“His study is so full of fossils and chemical apparatus of variouskinds that there is barely room to sit down.”
St. John’s Hill was a curious location for the house. At a
time when New T own was under way , and when David Humeand others would soon be building new and spacious housesthere, Hutton chose to build in the old town. The plot was justoutside the Flodden W all, toward the end of the Royal Mile nearthe Palace of Holyroodhouse. It was conveniently close to theUniversity of Edinburgh and the infirmary . The house was alsowithin a couple of blocks of the Davie/Hutton chemical works.But no doubt the main reason he built there was that the spotgave him an unblocked view of Arthur’s Seat, the massivemound at the eastern end of the city .
Arthur’s Seat is a highly unusual geologic formation, and it
was particularly inspirational for Hutton. There was no way forthe doctor to grasp all the geologic phenomena revealed there,125 THE ATHENS OF THE NORTH

but he must have sensed a fascinating history . Indeed, this one
spot embodied the deep past of the Edinburgh region: 350 mil-lion years ago, a volcano erupted, creating a volcanic cone; thenthe area was submerged under an ancient sea, the waters eventu-ally receding (or the land rising), leaving sedimentary rocksaround the volcanic cone; then followed earthquakes and moun-tain-forming pressure that further raised and distorted themound; and finally an ice-age glacier overran it all. However,eventually Hutton did recognize that the oddest feature, the wallof exposed dark rocks that traverses the side of the hill, called Sal-isbury Crags, was different from the other rocks on Arthur’s Seat.He alone realized that the Crags were younger rocks than thestrata around them. This realization became important later, ashe pondered the significance of subterranean heat and igneousrocks. Arthur’s Seat offered daily lessons for the philosopher.
Because Hutton had no worries or obligations, each day was
his own to do with as he pleased. According to Playfair, JamesHutton’s consistent daily habits allowed him to remain remark-ably focused on his geological inquiries, which now completelydominated his thoughts. He was a late sleeper, but once out ofbed he went directly to his study and began working. He ate hissmall midday meal quickly and alone. After eating, he wouldreturn to his studies for a few more hours, and then go for a longwalk, often along the paths up and down Arthur’s Seat, weatherpermitting. He read a great deal, primarily natural histories andtravelogues. These were used to augment his own observationsand verify his theories. He spent every evening with friends,either at home or at a tavern: “No professional, and rarely any1 2 6 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

domestic arrangement, interrupted this uniform course of life, so
that his time was wholly divided between the pursuits of scienceand the conversation of his friends.”
Most of Hutton’s companions were other natural philoso-
phers. But this was not just any collection of academics. Rather,the scholars who were part of James Hutton’s circle in Edin-burgh were so freethinking, so forward looking, so productive,and so prolific that collectively history remembers them as mem-bers of the Scottish Enlightenment. It was the environmentthese thinkers created—noted for constant personal interactionand the debate of new ideas—and the specific teachings thatthey shared that helped Hutton take what was a flash of insightformed at Slighhouses and turn it into something far more com-plete. The Scottish Enlightenment essentially served as theincubator for Hutton’s nascent idea and gave it the support andprotection it needed to mature as a fully realized, rigorous, androbust theory . The scholars of the Enlightenment would alsocreate the institution through which Hutton would announcehis theory to the world in 1785.
The Scottish Enlightenment was an intellectual movement
that complemented the Whig regime in the city . It celebrated
progressive ideas and witnessed significant contributions infields as diverse as geology , mineralogy , chemistry , medicine,political economy , history , philosophy , architecture, poetry , andportraiture. If there was a unifying theme or philosophy , it wasthat the “improvement” of the natural world—by means ofunderstanding and controlling it—was fundamentally good and127 THE ATHENS OF THE NORTH

proper. Related to this was the idea that Newton-inspired natural
laws could and should be applied to many phenomena, such ashuman nature and human history . Immanuel Kant’s characteriza-tion for the Enlightenment on the Continent also described theScottish version: “Dare to know .”
A group of native Scots, nearly all of them educated at Scot-
tish universities and most living within blocks of one another inEdinburgh, along with regular visitors from Glasgow and othernearby towns, made up the cast of enlightened scholars. Theywere primarily university professors, ministers, and lawyers/solicitors; as one historian calls them, the “teachers, preachers,and pleaders” of the city . The Scottish Enlightenment spannedtwo generations: the more influential group was born before1740, and the second wave was the following generation.
A short list of the most active participants includes Adam
Ferguson (1723–1816), considered the founder of sociologybecause of his book Essay on the History of Civil Society (1768);
William Robertson (1721–1793), one of the founders of mod-ern historical research and noted for his History of Scotland(1759); William Smellie (1740–1795), the printer and publisherwho compiled and edited the first edition of The EncyclopediaBritannica (published in installments from 1768 to 1771);
William Cullen (1710–1790), one of the leading early medicalresearchers and chemists of the time; Sir John Clerk of Eldin(1728–1812), who became the Clausewitz of naval warfarebecause of his book An Essay on Naval T actics (1790–1797);
Robert Adam (1728–1792), the influential architect; RobertBurns (1759–1796), the great poet; and Sir W alter Scott1 2 8 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

(1771–1832), who “invented” the historical novel and who
came of age during this vibrant period. Onto the list should alsobe added two men who never lived in Edinburgh but who vis-ited and maintained an active correspondence with the scholarsthere: Ben Franklin (1706–1790), the statesman and talentedpolymath who discovered electricity; and Erasmus Darwin(1731–1802), Charles Darwin’s grandfather and the author of aprecursor theory of evolution. John Playfair (1748–1819) andJames Hall (1761–1832) were key figures as well.
But beyond this impressive group, five individuals made
contributions so monumental that they still reverberate to thisday , over 200 years after their deaths. David Hume developedand published his influential philosophy of human nature, whichargued for the primacy of man’s passions. Adam Smith (1723–1790), one of Hume’s best friends, used parts of Hume’s philos-ophy while writing The Wealth of Nations, the book that started
the field of economics and allowed governments to finally under-stand the effects of laws on their nation’s economy . Joseph Black(1728–1799) isolated carbon dioxide, thus discovering that theatmosphere was made up of a mix of gases, and inspired AntoineLavoisier, the founder of modern chemistry . James W att(1736–1819), who worked in Black’s lab, went on to invent thepractical steam engine. Finally , there was James Hutton, thefather of geology and the discoverer of the antiquity of the earth.
Hutton’s relationship with Hume is unknown, for there is no
record to show that the two ever met (it is difficult to imagine thatthey did not know each other, however, given that they shared amutual friend in Black). The others were all Hutton’s friends,129 THE ATHENS OF THE NORTH

Joseph Black being the most important. It was Black who shared
his love of chemistry and helped Hutton navigate the social andintellectual network that was the Scottish Enlightenment.
Based on the observations left by those who interacted with
Hutton after he moved back to Edinburgh, the doctor–turnedfarmer–turned natural philosopher must have been regarded asa curiosity by those who encountered him. As one mineralogistwrote to another after meeting Hutton during a visit to Edin-burgh, “Dr. Hutton is the oddity you described, but a mightygood sort of man.” Just returned from his farm in the Borders,surrounded by rocks and chemicals in his overcrowded flat, hewould have been hard to take seriously . Even his attire was off;he was described as being careless in what he wore, and “oftenfound in direct collision” with the accepted fashions. But notJoseph Black. An internationally known scientist before the endof the 1750s, probably the brightest of the many stars at the Uni-versity of Edinburgh, and connected to every prominent citizenin the city , Black was the very essence of an insider. In fact, onehistorian of the period calls Black the éminence grise of the era.Black quickly realized the unique talents possessed by Hutton,and if Black said he was good company , then just about everyoneelse in Edinburgh soon felt the same way .
Although observers of the Scottish Enlightenment often
treat David Hume as the preeminent thinker of that period,
Joseph Black (he later became David Hume’s doctor) was thefirst to make a profound discovery . In the 1750s, while still amedical student at the University of Edinburgh, Black burst1 3 0 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

onto the scientific scene when he discovered carbon dioxide, the
first-ever instance of isolating one of the gases in the atmo -sphere; indeed, before Black’s discovery , no one had imaginedthat the atmosphere was a mixture of individual gases.
The path to this discovery was particularly significant for
Hutton because it involved a common mineral that would laterserve as proof of his theory of the earth. The experiment startedout modestly enough. Attempting to help resolve a conflictbetween two of his professors, Black sought to discern the mostefficient way to dissolve urine stones, a common affliction in theeighteenth century . He chose to experiment with magnesia alba,a type of limestone (limestone was already recognized for havingcertain medicinal characteristics). While making some simplemeasurements, he stumbled across an amazing thing. When themagnesia alba was heated, it lost 40 percent of its weight (it ishard to imagine today , but Black was among the first chemists touse a scale, a tool almost as important as the microscope). Blackapplied the term fixed air to the weight that was lost. Black’s
next step was to investigate the properties of the fixed air thathad been released. If trapped and unmixed with the surround-ing air, this fixed air killed living things, such as mice. Since thistoxic fixed air was clearly in the atmosphere (the process ofburning limestone is common enough), it followed that theremust be other components of the atmosphere that acted to dilutethe toxic properties. The realization that the atmosphere wasmade up of a mix of discrete gases was a revelation, setting thestage for Lavoisier to propose the oxygen theory in 1774 andfound modern chemistry .131 THE ATHENS OF THE NORTH

The paper that formally described Black’s discovery ,
“Experiments on Magnesia Alba, Quicklime, and other Alcaline
Substances,” published in 1756, was immediately recognized asseminal. Black, only twenty-eight years old and just out of med-ical school, was quickly deemed the leading chemist of his gen-eration. Over the next two years, Black made another importantdiscovery: He deduced the existence of latent heat. When acompound is in the process of changing states (for example, liq-uid water converting to steam), the compound continues toabsorb heat, even though its temperature remains unchanged.While exploring the phenomenon of latent heat, Black came tounderstand the role that pressure played on heated substances.W ater, for instance, maintains its liquid state under pressurewhen its absorbed heat would otherwise cause it to be convertedto steam. Black’s insights into heat and pressure would be vitallyimportant for Hutton’s work.
It is not known precisely when Black and Hutton first met,
but shortly after Hutton moved to Edinburgh, the two scientistsbecame fast friends. In 1771, Black wrote to James W att, “I wishI could give you a dose now and then of my friend Hutton’scompany , it would do you a world of good.” They would remainthe closest of friends for the rest of their lives. Adam Ferguson,Black’s contemporary biographer, wrote that Black’s closefriends were Cullen, W att, Hume, Smith, Monro, and Clerk ofEldin, but that
at the head of either list, however, in respect to Black’s habits
of intimacy , ought, perhaps, to have been placed James Hut-1 3 2 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

ton, who made up in physical speculation all that was want-
ing in any of the others. It may be difficult to say , whether thecharacters of Black and Hutton, so often mentioned together,were most to be remarked for resemblance or contrast....Black was serious, but not morose; Hutton playful, but notpetulant. The one never cracked a joke, the other neveru t t e r e d  a  s a r c a s m .  B l a c k  w a s  a l w a y s  o n  s o l i d  g r o u n d ....Hutton, whether for pleasantry or serious reflection, could bein the air.
It appears that they went to work on Hutton’s mineralogical
research without delay , chemistry now being the key tool
through which Hutton pursued his inquiries. As Playfair said, itwas through “Chemistry . . . that he took his departure in thecircum-navigation both of the material and intellectual world.”What he and Black focused on was the largest conundrum thatHutton unearthed at Slighhouses—the mystery of the mineraliz-ing principle. Most mineralogists believed that all visible rocks—granite, basalt, stratified rocks, marbles, and so forth—wereprecipitates (mineral remnants) from the universal ocean. Hut-ton found this difficult to believe because he had observedthrough his experiments that every possible substance appearedin rocks, even substances that could not be dissolved by water. Ifevery rock on the surface of the earth had precipitated fromwater, then water must be able to dissolve every substance foundin rocks. But this simply was not true. During the course of hisresearch with Black, Hutton resolved that heat from within theearth was the only conceivable mineralizing principle. However,133 THE ATHENS OF THE NORTH

it was crucial that heat be coupled with intense pressure, which
always exists under the heavy sediments that rest on the oceanfloor.
1Over the next fifteen years, Hutton would take his early
insights from Slighhouses (that erosion is acting on all materialsat all times, and that the land we are living on is made of ancienteroded material), combine them with his realization about thepower of heat and pressure, and develop them into a stunninglyoriginal theory .
An extraordinarily popular teacher, Joseph Black had many
outstanding students who went on to make significant intellec-
tual contributions. His most famous young charge was easilyJames W att. 
W att was hired as the “mathematical instrument maker to
the university” of Glasgow in 1757, one year after Joseph Blackstarted there as professor of chemistry (Black moved to the Uni-versity of Edinburgh in 1766). He worked with both Black andJohn Robison, who was professor of physics at Glasgow andwould also eventually move to the University of Edinburgh afterBlack. W att was an astute young man who had a bent for both1 3 4 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME
1As mentioned earlier, geologists today understand that the mineralizing
principle (the modern term is lithification) for sedimentary rocks is pressure cou-
pled with the cementing that occurs when water and air are squeezed out of the
material. Though Hutton was wrong about the need for heat for the formation ofsedimentary rocks, he was the first to recognize the importance of pressure. Hut-ton, however, was right in believing that heat and pressure are the keys to the for-mation of metamorphic rocks, though in the late eighteenth century , metamorphicrocks were considered sedimentary .

science and engineering. In the winter of 1763–1764, he was
asked to repair a working model of the Newcomen steam engine,which the university had purchased to further understand howit worked (the Newcomen engine was the first steam-poweredengine; invented in 1712, it was very large and slow , and wasmainly used in settings where its sluggish power made sense,such as driving a slow-acting pump in a mine, its first applica-tion). W att was able to repair the model, but as he was fixing ithe realized that it was a grossly inefficient contraption. TheNewcomen engine had just one cylinder, to which the pistonwas attached; the heating and cooling of the single cylinder cre-ated the vacuum that caused the piston to rise and fall, andpower whatever was attached to it. But the energy loss wastremendous, and the engine was plodding. W att realized that if asecond cylinder could be added that would quickly provide thecooling/heating action to the piston-cylinder, one could achievesignificantly greater speed and productivity . This is preciselywhat he built: a two-cylinder, separate condenser, steam engine.He patented the idea in 1769.
Through Black, James Hutton and James W att became close
friends, too. Hutton accompanied W att on his historic movefrom Glasgow to Birmingham to begin his partnership withMatthew Bolton, a pairing that would play a central role in theIndustrial Revolution. Leaving Glasgow in the early summer of1774, the two travelers reached Birmingham about two weekslater; Hutton then took his leave of the young inventor and spentthe next several weeks exploring the geology of southwest En -gland and W ales. Though this period is the only documented135 THE ATHENS OF THE NORTH

geologic excursion that Hutton embarked on from 1764 (when
he visited the Highlands with Clerk-Maxwell) to 1785 (after hislectures), there were surely others. After the doctor returned toEdinburgh in the late summer of 1774, he claimed in a letter toClerk-Maxwell that ”I think I know pretty well now what En -gland is made of except for Cornwall.”
The other important introduction made by Black on Hut-
ton’s behalf was to Adam Smith. Smith was perhaps DavidHume’s best friend; they had known each other for twenty-fiveyears when Hume died, and had conducted one of the mostlearned correspondences in intellectual history . David Hume fellill in 1775 with what was either intestinal or stomach cancer. Hedied one year later, at his home in New T own. Joseph Black wasHume’s doctor (Black was a medical doctor, as were manychemists at the time, but he had only a handful of patients), andhe wrote to Smith many times during Hume’s difficult last year toreport on his health. As a result, the two developed a friendship.
Adam Smith had been a well-known philosopher and writer
since the appearance of his first book, The Theory of Moral Sen-
timents, in 1759. He finished his second book, An Inquiry into
the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (1776), several
months before Hume’s death. Smith had been working on it foryears, so the book was widely anticipated. The response to itsappearance was immediate and enthusiastic; the first printing ofthe book was sold out in six months in an era when books wereusually printed just once. It was quickly reviewed in every majorpublication in England and Scotland, and overnight it achievedits status as one of the clearest, most useful, and most influential1 3 6 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

books ever written, a reputation it still enjoys today . The goal of
the book was to analyze how national economies grow , and in sodoing it made at least five powerful pronouncements: that aneconomy was a system (in the spirit of Newton), meaning anaction in one sector would have an impact in another sector; thatthe growth of wealth meant the increased buying and selling ofgoods, such as clothing, not the accumulation of money (gold orsilver); that the key to efficient buying and selling was free mar-kets and an uncontrolled price system; that the key to growth wasinnovation; and that the key to innovation was the division oflabor, which allowed for efficiency and the gaining of expertise.All five of these precepts have stood the test of time. The bookhad immediate practical influence, too. The British chancellor ofthe exchequer proposed new tax initiatives for the national bud -gets of 1777 and 1778 based on Smith’s book. William Pitt theY ounger followed its teachings on free trade and unencumberedmarkets when he was prime minister in the 1780s.
After the publication of The Wealth of Nations, Smith was
appointed one of the five commissioners on the Scotch Boardof Customs because the leaders of Edinburgh wanted to keeptheir famous citizen in Scotland. Thus, Smith moved to Edin-burgh for the first time in 1777 after having lived most of hislife in Kilkaldy (25 miles away) and Glasgow (45 miles away).The work at the Board of Customs was easy and routine, butSmith took the job seriously and rarely missed a day of work.He told acquaintances that the job was very useful to his under-standing of political economy , and future editions of The
Wealth of Nations (four more were published before he died)137 THE ATHENS OF THE NORTH

were enriched with numerous examples from cases and dis-
putes brought before the board.
He bought a spacious home soon after he arrived in the city ,
and brought his elderly mother, a cousin, and her nephew to livewith him. The house was located just off High Street, near Holy-roodhouse. It was only a couple of blocks from James Hutton’shouse, and Joseph Black lived nearby , too. The Custom House,where Smith worked, was also situated on High Street, abouthalf a mile up the ridge, heading toward the castle. Smith’shabits were rigid; he walked up High Street at the same timeeach morning on his way to work, and strolled back down in thelate afternoon. He cut quite a figure. He always carried a cane,but never used it—rather he rested it on his shoulder “as a sol-dier carries his musket.” He dressed well, but not extravagantly .Like Hutton, he struck observers with his eccentricities becausehe often talked to himself, and his head turned from side to sidewhile he walked. One of his biographers commented, “Often,moreover, his lips would be moving all the while, and smiling inrapt conversation with invisible companions.”
Like Hutton and Black, Adam Smith was unmarried.
Though he was sociable and fond of company , accounts of theperiod indicate that he was shy and spoke up only if called upon.His biographer mentioned that “Smith’s house was noted for itssimple and unpretending hospitality . He liked to have his friendsabout him without the formality of an invitation, and fewstrangers of distinction visited Edinburgh without being enter-tained in Panmure (Smith’s) House.” Every Sunday night he1 3 8 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

hosted a dinner for friends and guests, and lively discussions
were encouraged.
Informal but regular dinner parties like Smith’s were com-
mon in Edinburgh during the years of the Scottish Enlighten-
ment, and they were one of the ways in which ideas wereexchanged. A productive cross-fertilization often resulted. AllanRamsay , a successful painter and the son of one of Scotland’smost noted poets, once wrote in a letter: “By much drinking withDavid Hume and his associates, I have learnt to be very histori-cal; and am nightly confirmed in the belief, that it is much easierto tell the How than the Why of any thing; and that it is moreoverbetter suited to the state of man; who, we are all satisfied, fromself-examination, is any thing rather than a rational animal.”
Hutton and Black followed the practice as well. As one Uni-
versity of Edinburgh student wrote in the 1780s: “W e are goingto take a Christmas dinner with Dr. Black on Monday nextwhere we meet a good number of students. The Dr. himself is solazy he is obliged to get Dr. Hutton to be master of all the cere-monial part. The Dr. [Black] likes to sleep after dinner.”
Social clubs were yet another means of intellectual
exchange. Other cities had clubs, of course, but Edinburgh wasknown to have more of them and a greater diversity . One of thefirst ones founded was the Cape Club; a member summed up itsraison d’être: “The purpose and intention of the Society was:after the business of the day was over to pass the evening sociallywith a set of select companions in an agreeable and at the same139 THE ATHENS OF THE NORTH

time a rational and frugal manner; for this purpose beer and
porter were their liquors, from fourpence to sixpence each theextent of their usual expense, conversation and a song theiramusement, gaming generally prohibited, and a freedom foreach to come and to depart at their pleasure was always consid-ered as essential to the constitution of the Society .”
The clubs almost always met weekly in a public house or
oyster cellar. The company often included both men andwomen, and distinguished out-of-towners were welcome. Manycitizens of Glasgow regularly made the 45-mile, one-day jour-ney . In addition to the Cape Club, there was the Boar Club(members were called “boars,” the room they met in was calledthe “sty ,” etc.); the Mirror Club, which met to promote agricul-tural improvement; the Rankenian Club, which discussedphilosophical issues; the Poker Club, which formed to lobby fora Scottish militia; and the Crochallan Fencilbles, which soughtto encourage Scottish literature. The Select Society , started in1754, became more ambitious by scheduling one of its mem-bers to present a formal speech, later to be discussed and cri-tiqued by those assembled. As one member later recalled,“These convivial meetings frequently improved the membermore by free conversation than the speeches in the Society . Itwas those meetings in particular that rubbed off all corners, aswe call it, by collision, and made the literati of Edinburgh lesscaptious and pedantic than they were elsewhere.”
Though Black and Smith were members of several of these
clubs, it does not appear that Hutton frequented them. But soonafter Adam Smith settled in the city in 1777, he, Black, and Hut-1 4 0 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

ton founded their own club, known as the Oyster Club. Smith’s
biographer provided this description: “I have already mentionedhis Sunday suppers, but beside these he founded, soon after set-tling in Edinburgh, in co-operation with the two friends whowere his closest associates during the whole of this last period ofhis career—Black, the chemist, and Hutton, the geologist—aweekly dining club, which met every Friday at two o’clock in atavern in the Grassmarket.” Dr. Swediaur, a Paris physician whospent time in Edinburgh in 1784 conducting research withWilliam Cullen, and was made a member of the Oyster Club dur-ing his stay , wrote to Jeremy Bentham: “W e have a club herewhich consists of nothing but philosophers. Dr. Adam Smith,Cullen, Black, Mr. McGowan, etc., belong to it, and I am also amember of it. Thus I spend once a week in a most enlightenedand agreeable, cheerful and social company .” John Playfair left asimilarly affectionate comment: “As all three possessed great tal-ents, enlarged views, and extensive information, without any ofthe stateliness and formality which men of letters think it some-times necessary to affect, as they were all three easily amused,and as the sincerity of their friendship had never been darkenedby the least shade of envy , it would be hard to find an examplewhere everything favorable to good society was more perfectlyunited and everything adverse more entirely excluded.”
The spirit of Colin Maclaurin had most tangibly lived on
through the existence of Edinburgh’s most formal learned
society , the Philosophical Society , founded in 1737. Maclaurinfelt that Edinburgh needed an answer to London’s famous141 THE ATHENS OF THE NORTH

Royal Society (to which he already belonged), so he convinced
Alexander Monro, the first professor of the medical school, tobroaden his Society for the Improvement of Medical Knowl-edge (started in 1731) into a general scientific organization.For many years after Maclaurin’s death, the PhilosophicalSociety remained active; Joseph Black’s paper on magnesiaalba and carbon dioxide was published in one of its three pro-ceedings volumes. Hutton had joined the society soon aftersettling in Edinburgh, probably through Black’s sponsorship.Though it never actually ceased to exist, by the late 1770s, ithad become moribund.
In 1782, a group outside the university planned to petition
the government in London to grant them a royal charter tofound a natural history museum and sponsor lectures. JohnW alker (1731–1803), professor of natural history at the univer-sity and the curator of its natural history museum, objectedvehemently to this proposal. He felt strongly that the newmuseum would dilute the university’s holdings because theywould be competing for the same specimens, archives, and arti-facts. So W alker lobbied for the university to reach a compro-mise with the competing group.
The outcome of a convoluted negotiation was the founding
of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, by royal charter, in May1783. The new society was officially a merging of the Philo-sophical Society with parts of the university . Its purpose was toencourage and disseminate outstanding scholarship in the sci-ences, philosophy , history , and literature. Nearly all of the sixtyfellows of the Philosophical Society became the founding fel-1 4 2 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

lows of the Royal Society . The roster was a “who’s who” of the
Enlightenment: Black, Smith, Cullen, Ferguson, Robertson,Robison, Colin Maclaurin’s son John, and, of course, Hutton.
Sometime in 1784, an invitation was formally extended to
Hutton to present to the society two lectures on his theory of theearth. This prestigious invitation would force Hutton to synthe-size the work and reflection he had conducted over the pastthirty years. And it would spark an intellectual revolution thatwould eventually lead to modern geology , evolutionary biology ,and an understanding of the true age of the earth.143 THE ATHENS OF THE NORTH

This page intentionally left blank 

8
The Eureka Moments
Dr. Hutton made several excursions into different parts 
of Scotland, with a view of comparing certain results 
of his theory of the earth with actual observation.
John Playfair, 1805
The fellows of the Royal Society of Edinburgh left their
offices, studies, laboratories, and court chambers in the early
afternoon of March 7, 1785, and started walking toward the uni-versity library for that day’s meeting. Adam Smith closed hisoffice at the Custom House early and walked down High Streetwith his trademark cane, turning right at Nicholson Street on hisway to the university . Professors Playfair, Cullen, Robison, andRobertson were already at the university , so they had the briefestof strolls across the courtyard. There was great anticipation forthis gathering because this was the day of the long-awaited for-mal presentation of James Hutton’s theory of the earth. Almost
145

everyone attending the talk knew Hutton personally , and they
were aware of his decades-long fascination with minerals and thesurface of the earth. But almost no one knew what kind of gen-eral theory this fascination had led to. They were in for quite asurprise.
No record remains of precisely who sat in the library that
day to hear the first of two scheduled lectures. There were over150 members of the society , but many—such as James W att andBenjamin Franklin—did not live in Edinburgh. The society wasalso divided into two groups, the Physical Class and the LiteraryClass. The latter convened on a different day and may have beenless motivated to listen to a talk on a topic outside its main inter-ests. For the members of the Physical Class, though, this wasgoing to be a riveting session, and everyone who was not ill orout of town would have found a way to attend. So at least fifty ofthe most learned men in Scotland assembled to hear the“famous fossil philosopher” address them. The person Huttonwas probably most eager to impress, however, was ProfessorJohn W alker.
W alker had been professor of natural history at the univer-
sity since 1779, and was instrumental in the founding of theRoyal Society . As secretary of the Physical Class, he must havebeen involved in soliciting Hutton to give his talks. W alker wasborn in Edinburgh in 1731; like Hutton, he came from a com-fortable family . He attended the University of Edinburgh in the1740s, where he developed an interest in chemistry . Afterward,he became enthusiastic about mineralogy . In 1764, he toured theHighlands (Hutton’s Highland tour was the same year) as a min-1 4 6 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

eralogist assessing forfeited estates, just as Hutton did with
George Clerk-Maxwell. Unlike Hutton, though, W alker was aChristian and became a minister in the Church of Scotland inthe 1750s. As a young man, he had cultivated ties to prominentcitizens of Edinburgh, especially William Cullen, and these con-nections eventually helped him to gain his appointment to theuniversity .
As a professor at the university and Keeper of the Natural
History Museum (which had a large mineral collection), W alkerintroduced the first known geology course in the  English-speaking world, which started in 1781. Copies of his coursenotes make it  clear that he believed in the biblical age of theearth, and that he generally followed the teachings of the mostinfluential geologist of the day , Abraham Gottlob W erner.Because W erner’s theory of the history of the earth was so well-known and accepted, it is important to describe it in some detail.The specter of W erner would haunt Hutton and his supportersfor years.
Abraham Gottlob Werner (1749–1817) was twenty-three
years younger than Hutton, and by 1785, he was known
throughout Europe. W erner had spent his youth surrounded byrocks and ores—his father was the inspector of the Duke ofSolm’s ironworks—and had emerged as a fine mineralogist at ayoung age. In 1774, he published what was essentially the firstrigorous field guide for identifying and analyzing minerals. Onthe strength of this book, W erner was given a professorship at theFreiburg School of Mines (in the German province of Saxony) in147 THE EUREKA MOMENTS

1775, at the age of twenty-six. He was a gifted lecturer, and,
much like Joseph Black’s, his international fame rested on a fewpublications, a renowned course, and the small army of inspiredstudents who had heard his lectures and then spread theW ernerian vision as they scattered throughout the universities ofEurope. He started teaching his historical geology class in 1779,making it the first of its kind in Europe. Many of W erner’s stu-dents drafted informal manuscripts based on lecture notes,which were then circulated among the international mineralogycommunity . By the time Hutton delivered his lectures to theRoyal Society of Edinburgh, W erner’s view of the history of theearth was accepted in most scholarly circles.
The W ernerian model was a synthesis of several precursors.
He started with Buffon’s theory of the earth, found in his thirty-four-volume Histoire Naturelle (1749). As described earlier,
Buffon’s theory was complex, but in essence argued that theearth formed when a comet collided with the Sun and the ejectare-formed into a planet. Buffon believed that the earth had oncebeen as hot as the Sun, but that it was now slowly cooling off andwould someday stop supporting life. As it cooled, according toBuffon, the earth became covered by a universal ocean, and thefeatures of the continents were formed as the ocean receded andevaporated. This meant that all the rocks on the earth had pre-cipitated out of the universal ocean.
W erner next looked to Italian mineralogist Giovanni
Arduino, who in 1759 published a classification scheme for allvisible rock groups. “Primary” rocks were formed at Creationand had no fossils in them; they were still visible among the1 4 8 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

highest mountains, such as the Alps. “Secondary” rocks were
the earliest stratified rocks and they were represented by lime-stone and shale; “T ertiary” rocks were fossil-filled clays andsandstones. The youngest rocks in the world were volcanicrocks, from recent eruptions. Arduino was probably influencedby the German mineralogist Johann Lehmann, who had firstpresented this classification but had explicitly correlated the cat-egories with the Bible; thus, Primary rocks were formed at Cre-ation, Secondary during the Deluge, and T ertiary after theDeluge. Arduino’s scheme was less biblically oriented.
W erner embraced the idea of the universal ocean coupled
with the distinctive rock groups of Lehmann and Arduino.W erner’s universal ocean had been slowly receding since itsinception. As time went on, different types of rocks wererevealed. Primary rocks were the oldest; they were the earth’shighest and were found in mountain ranges. These rocks con-tained no fossils because they were formed before living organ-isms appeared. The next group of rocks was called T ransition(a group that W erner inserted into Arduino’s scheme), and theywere the oldest and most distorted stratified rocks, made oferoded Primary rocks and primitive dead organisms. They wereoften vertical and broken because they had formed on the surfaceof the chaotically shaped Primary rocks, or because ancient cav-erns had collapsed under the weight of these early sediments.The universal ocean was stormy during this stage, a conditionthat contributed to the extreme shapes of the layers and the manydead organisms now manifested as fossils. Secondary rocks weremore recent stratified rocks, formed from eroded Primary and149 THE EUREKA MOMENTS

T ransition rocks and normally found in horizontal beds. The
final type of rock was Alluvial, formed by such recent events asvolcanoes or floods. Of particular significance, W erner arguedthat granite, a very common rock in mountain ranges, was a Pri-mary rock, the first to precipitate from the universal ocean andtherefore the oldest type of rock. W erner’s theory was embracedby most of the scientific community because it seemed to explainall the rock formations found around the world. The Christiancommunity accepted it, too, because W erner did not openly dis-pute the biblical time frame (although privately he had hisdoubts), and the universal ocean could be interpreted either asNoah’s Flood or the original waters of Creation.
When the scholars started arriving at the library , they were
surprised to see Joseph Black, not James Hutton, sitting near the
front of the room. Whether it was because of nerves or a genuineillness that afflicted him at an inopportune time, Hutton was sosick on this important day that he could not even deliver his ownlecture. It is possible that he was not even in the room. Luckily ,the rules of the Royal Society had forced Hutton to draft the lec-ture so that it could be published; thus, it was available to be readby someone else if the need arose. In a way , Hutton’s incapacita-tion worked in his favor. Joseph Black, his best friend, agreed todeliver the talk in his place. Black was reputed to have a mar-velous baritone voice and a cadence that enticed listeners, and hisyears of classroom experience made him relaxed and polished infront of an audience. More important, he was a lionized scientistand his agreeing to read the lecture gave it his implicit approval.1 5 0 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

Once the fellows and guests had found their seats, Black took
his place behind the lectern and began. The title was intriguing:
“Concerning the System of the Earth, Its Duration, and Stabil-ity .” Black’s opening line immediately commanded the audi-ence’s attention: “The purpose of this Dissertation is to formsome estimate with regard to the time the globe of this earth hasexisted, as a world maintaining plants and animals; to reason withregard to the changes which the earth has undergone; and to seehow far an end or termination to this system of things may be per-ceived, from the consideration of that which has already come topass.” On that first day , Black described Hutton’s observationthat most of the land on which people now live is made up of thewaste of past land, that is, stratified rocks. W e know that twothings have happened—“collections of loose or incoherent mate-rials” have been consolidated, and those “consolidated masses”have been somehow elevated above the sea to form new land.Black continued by saying that the present inquiry was aimed atlearning how these two related processes occurred. The rest ofthe first lecture focused on the formation of strata, Hutton/Blackin the end discounting aqueous causes and instead proposingthat heat and pressure were the reasons for consolidation.
The second lecture was delivered exactly four weeks later, on
April 4. This time, James Hutton was well enough to do his owntalking. Having deduced how stratified rocks formed, Hutton’snext inquiry concerned the elevation of the new strata from belowthe seas to form new land. Once again, Hutton called on thepower of heat—subterranean heat—as the causal force. Simplyput, the elevation could not be the result of receding water; if it151 THE EUREKA MOMENTS

were, all stratified rocks would be horizontal, just as they had
formed on the floor of lakes, seas, and oceans. Instead, it was wellknown that many strata were found in every degree of “fracture,flexure, and contortion”; therefore some force was pushing thestrata upwards. The only available force was hot liquid rock, cre-ated by the same heat that caused the consolidation of stratifiedrocks. His proof of this phenomenon was “mineral veins, thosegreat fissures of the earth, which contain matter perfectly foreignto the strata they traverse.” Because these veins clearly came frombelow the strata, hot liquid rock must have been pushing frombeneath, lifting the new stratified rocks above the sea. Huttonargued that we knew the earth had experienced this cycle ofregeneration in the past because we could see fossils of “everymanner of vegetable production . . . in the strata of our earth.”This meant that dry land containing plants had eroded to formunderwater sediments, and those sediments had later been raisedas new land, where people could later find the evidence of thelong-dead organisms in fossils dug from the new dry land.
At last, Hutton arrived at his remarkable conclusion, one
that was based on simple logic and observation. Thus, “a ques-tion naturally occurs with regard to time; what has been thespace of time necessary for accomplishing this great work?” Heurged his listeners to reflect on erosion, of which they were allaware: “As there is not in human observation proper means formeasuring the waste of land upon the globe, it is hence inferred,that we cannot estimate the duration of what we see at present,nor calculate the period at which it had begun; so that, withrespect to human observation, this world has neither a begin-1 5 2 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

ning nor an end.” It is important to note that Hutton was argu-
ing that the earth is unknowably old, not eternal; the phrase“with respect to human observation” is critical in this context.
Like Charles Darwin, whose best friends did not know the
full extent of his views until his paper on natural selection wasfirst presented, Hutton had dropped a bombshell. By 1785,many theories of the earth had been put forth, so Hutton’s wasjust one more. But nearly all previous theories had worked withinthe biblically prescribed 6,000 years, or they had sidestepped theissue entirely . Only one noted scholar had been as bold as Hut-ton. A few years before Hutton’s talk, Buffon had revised hisfamous 1749 book, arguing that the age of the earth was 75,000years (he arrived at this number by estimating how quickly theearth had cooled from its original molten state). However,because many features of Buffon’s original hypothesis were nolonger accepted, and W erner’s theory was gaining popularity , the1778 revision did not have nearly the same impact as the original.But even if it had, Buffon’s 75,000 years were a simple multipleof 6,000. The earth was still very young. Hutton’s idea, on theother hand, was revolutionary; simple observation of the landforced one to acknowledge that the earth was profoundly ancient,so old that one could not even hazard a guess as to its age.
Joseph Black had discovered carbon dioxide and the nature
of the atmosphere; Adam Smith had properly analyzed howeconomies work; William Cullen had devised many importantmedical procedures and practical chemical discoveries for thetextile industry; John Playfair was working on a text aboutEuclid’s geometry . These were important contributions. But if153 THE EUREKA MOMENTS

Hutton was right, his theory made the others pale before it. His
would challenge the very place of humans in the cosmos.
No account exists of how Hutton’s lectures were received in
the early months of 1785. Playfair states that “the truth is, that
[the theory] drew their attention very slowly , so that severalyears elapsed before any one showed himself publicly con-cerned about it, either as an enemy or a friend.” Playfair wasprobably referring to written reaction because it was not until1788 that the first published reviews appeared. The only otherreference to the lectures before 1788 comes from Adam Fergu-son, who in a 1787 letter to a famous French geologist, Horacede Saussure, wrote, “His (Hutton’s) ideas are magnificent and,what is more precious and more difficult in science, formed witha scrupulous regard for reality .”
Still, there must have been some reaction from the members
of the Royal Society who sat in the library those two Fridays.W alker surely voiced his objections, since he disagreed with somany of Hutton’s assertions. All that is known for sure, though,is that immediately after giving the lectures, Hutton set out on aseries of field trips designed to provide evidence for his posi-tions. Just as a teacher needs to give a lecture at least once tolearn what the students do and do not grasp, Hutton learned bythe audience’s reaction which parts of his theory “worked” andwhich ones cried out for proof.
Hutton must have realized that his critics did not much care
about the claim that the mineralizing process was caused byheat. However, they did care about his contention that the earth1 5 4 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

behaved in a cyclical fashion. The only way such a cycle could
exist was if subterranean heat had caused hot rocks to pushupward toward the surface. Thus, the major controversy wasover Hutton’s argument that heat was the engine that causedsubmerged stratified rocks to rise above the sea. Hutton’s proofwas that mineral veins could be found permeating stratifiedrocks: “In many places those consolidated strata had been bro-ken and invaded by huge masses of fluid matter similar to lava,but, for the most part, perfectly distinguishable from it.”
Hutton hypothesized that the “fluid matter” intrusions were
made of granite, and that they were formed when fresh hotmagma from within the earth, “the mineral region,” welled upand forced its way into older stratified rocks. They then raisedthe strata above the sea. W erner and his followers thoughtexactly the opposite: that those granite veins were Primaryrocks, formed at the earliest stage of the earth’s history and pre-cipitated from the universal ocean, and that the stratified rockssurrounding these Primary rocks had formed around them atsome later stage. They had their unusual shape because ofancient movements that were now impossible to re-create.
James Hutton resolved to go into the field and find proof that
granite intrusions formed from within the earth and were there-
fore younger than the overlaying strata. He enrolled one of hisfriends, Sir John Clerk of Eldin, the younger brother of GeorgeClerk-Maxwell and himself a talented mineralogist and artist, toaccompany him in an effort to find strata cut by granite. Theywere looking for an exposure in which the shape and direction155 THE EUREKA MOMENTS

of the veins demonstrated that it came from below . Hutton knew
from his 1764 trip to the Highlands with George Clerk-Maxwellthat what he called “veined granite” was common there. In alater paper describing his search for granite, Hutton stated that“this question could only be determined by the examination ofthat species of granite upon the spot, of where it is to be foundin immediate connection with those bodies which are evidentlystratified.” This was likely a line directed at John W alker, whostressed the need to see rocks in the field, not in the lab.
Hutton had become acquainted with the Duke of Athol,
whose estate was in the town of Blair in the eastern Highlandsnorth of Dundee and west of Aberdeen. The estate was justsouth of the Grampian Mountains in the part of the Highlandswhere the granite of the mountains often mixed with the strati-fied rock. Hutton remembered that the area contained manystreams and rivers, which would create vivid exposures. Huttonmentioned his goal to the duke, who then invited Hutton andClerk to visit during hunting season, when his party would betraveling to Glen Tilt. As Playfair described it, “The Tilt is,according to the seasons, a small river, or an impetuous torrent,which runs through a glen of the same name.”
Playfair went on to relate what happened next: 
When they reached the forest lodge, about seven miles up the
valley , Dr. Hutton already found himself in the midst of theobjects which he wished to examine. In the bed of the river,many veins of red granite, (no less indeed than six large veinsin the course of a mile), were seen traversing the black mica-1 5 6 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

ceous schistus, and producing, by contrast of color, an effect
that might be striking even to an unskillful observer. The sightof objects which verified at once so many important conclu-sions in his system, filled him with delight; and his feelings, onsuch occasions, were always strongly expressed, the guideswho accompanied him were convinced that it must be noth-ing less than the discovery of a vein of silver or gold, that couldcall forth such strong marks of joy and exultation.
The formation “most clearly demonstrates the violence
with which the granitic veins were injected among the schis-
tus.” Hutton later commented about seeing the Glen Tilt veinsfor the first time: “I here had every satisfaction that it was pos-sible to desire.”
The next summer, Hutton and Clerk again headed into the
field. Hutton was now sixty years old and Clerk fifty-eight. Thistime they went to Galloway , a region at the extreme southwest ofScotland, and found more evidence of granite invading stratafrom below . In Hutton’s words: 
W e therefore left the chaise . . . while we ran with some impa-
tience along the bottom of the sandy bay to the rocky shorewhich was washed by the sea ....  B u t  b r e a king through the
bushes and briars, and climbing up the rocky bank . . . wesaw something that was much more satisfactory ....  F o r  h e r e
we found the granite interjected among the strata, indescending among them like a mineral vein, and terminating
in a thread where it could penetrate no farther . . . [this] will157 THE EUREKA MOMENTS

convince the most skeptical with regard to this doctrine of
the transfusion of granite.
The following summer, this time assisted by Clerk’s son,
Hutton visited the island of Arran, which lies in the Firth of
Clyde, southwest of Glasgow . Once again, he was looking forgranite meeting with stratified rock. And again, he was success-ful: “Having once got hold of the clue or caught the scent, wetraced back (with more animation than could have beenexpected from such an innocent chase) the object of our investi-gation all the way to the Cataract rock. Great veins of granite maybe seen traversing the schistus, and ramifying in all directions. Iprocured a specimen, which I have had conveyed to Edinburgh,though weighing above 600 pounds.” Indeed, Hutton did ship ahuge boulder from Arran back to his house.
The trips to Glen Tilt, Galloway , and Arran supplied ample
proof of Hutton’s contention that granite was formed by subter-ranean heat, that it often flowed underground, and that it forcedits way into overlaying strata. More important, it showed thatsubterranean heat could indeed be a force that raised the land.This finding went a long way toward buttressing his theory .However, the other revolutionary idea in his scheme, that theearth recycles itself, was not necessarily proved by the granite dis-coveries. It was critical to find evidence that a cycle had actuallyoccurred. That was what the breathtaking discovery at SiccarPoint in 1788 provided. After that successful excursion along theNorth Sea coast, Hutton at last felt that his theory was secure.1 5 8 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

In 1788, the full-length paper based on the 1785 lectures
finally appeared in print. The ninety-five-page document was
published in the first volume of the Proceedings of the RoyalSociety. Though published three years—and four productive
field trips—after the original lectures, the printed version didnot mention the discoveries at Glen Tilt and Siccar Point. Hut-ton must have finished the manuscript in 1785, and the print-ers for the Royal Society of Edinburgh must have beenextraordinarily slow .
Three reviews of Hutton’s paper appeared in 1788, just
months after the publication of the Royal Society’s volume. Thefirst appeared in the widely read Monthly Review, a journal that
culled news and findings from recent publications. In two pages,the anonymous article summarized Hutton’s argument, but thendismissively pointed out that Hutton argued for “a regular suc-cession of Earth from all eternity! And that the succession will berepeated for ever!!” Because Hutton had not ventured a guessabout the actual age of the earth, confusion was created amongmany of his reviewers, for they thought that he was arguing for aneternal earth, which he was not. In the previous articles the editorsof the Review had stated their agreement with the “allegiance
between Nature and Revelation, which the wisest men of all ageshave discerned and admired, and which the minute philosophersof the present times have made many important efforts to destroy .”
One paragraph was all it took for the Analytical Review to
dismiss Hutton as simply another grand theorist with few factsto support his “philosophical romances.”159 THE EUREKA MOMENTS

But the Critical Review gave Hutton’s paper a four-page cri-
tique that accurately described Hutton’s positions. It did not
embrace the theory , but it did not reject it, either, and it recog-nized the rigorous scholarship found in it.
In 1789, a new book appeared: The Natural History of the
Mineral Kingdom by John Williams. It included a forty-page
addition that was written and printed quickly to respond to Hut-ton. The inserted chapter summarized Hutton’s arguments,refuting each in turn, and concluded with a comment about Hut-ton’s proposed eternal earth (which he had not claimed): “Thewild and unnatural notion of the eternity of the world leads firstto skepticism, and at last to downright infidelity and atheism.”
These essentially negative reviews seemed to have had very
little effect on Hutton, who was confident in his theory , andsecure with the knowledge that Black, Playfair, and Hall—andno doubt many others in the Royal Society—supported him.
However, one review did goad him into action. The hurtful
critique was by Richard Kirwan (1733–1812), who published athirty-page paper on Hutton’s theory in the T ransactions of the
Royal Irish Academy (1793). Kirwan was a respected scientist who
as a young man had trained to be a Jesuit priest. In 1787, after liv-ing in London for ten years, he returned to Ireland and helpedfound the Royal Irish Academy . At one point in his review heattacked Hutton for proposing cycles, which were “contrary to rea-son and the tenor of the mosaic (Book of Moses) history .” He alsoessentially accused Hutton of being an atheist and blasphemer.
In the summer of 1793, the same year that Kirwan’s paper
was published, James Hutton suffered a serious illness. He was1 6 0 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

retaining urine, which could have been caused by kidney failure.
He was so ill that he needed surgery , which in the late eighteenthcentury was anything but routine. Though very weak from the ill-ness and surgery , Hutton resolved to write a major expansion ofthe 1788 paper the “very day after Mr. Kirwan’s paper was putinto his hands.” Unfortunately , Hutton never really recovered hisstrength, and he suffered terribly while working on his book.This no doubt helps to explain why The Theory of the Earth,published in 1795, has always been regarded as poorly written(though the 1788 paper and the 1785 abstract of the Royal Soci-ety of Edinburgh lectures are both accessible and clear).
After the book came out, the sixty-nine-year-old Hutton
again fell seriously ill from the same ailment. He was confined tohis house, and during the winter of 1796–1797 “he becamegradually weaker, was extremely emaciated, and suffered muchpain.” Playfair describes his last day: 
On Saturday , the 26th of March he suffered a good deal of
pain; but nevertheless, employed himself in writing, and par-ticularly in noting down his remarks on some attempts whichwere then making towards a new mineralogical nomencla-ture. In the evening he was seized with a shivering, and hisuneasiness continuing to increase, he sent of his friend Mr.Russel, who attended him as his surgeon. Before he couldpossibly arrive, all medical assistance was in vain: Dr. Huttonhad just strength left to stretch out his hand to him, andimmediately expired.161 THE EUREKA MOMENTS

This page intentionally left blank 

9
Hutton’s Boswell’s
At any other time, the force and elegance of Playfair’s style must have
insured popularity to the Huttonian doctrines; but, by a singular
coincidence, neptunianism and orthodoxy were now associated in the same
creed; the tide of prejudice ran so strong, that the majority were carried
away into the chaotic fluid, and other cosmological inventions of W erner.
Charles Lyell, 1830
James Hutton died on the evening of Saturday , March 26,
1797, at the age of seventy . One sister, Isabella, survived him. He
was buried in Greyfriar’s Cemetery , the largest cemetery in thecity , lying below the south side of imposing Edinburgh Castle.Although he had been ill for over four years, the doctor hadinexplicably made no effort to get his affairs in order. JosephBlack, the very picture of organization and preparation himself,was pressed into service to deal with Hutton’s considerableestate. Several weeks after Hutton’s death, Black and the rest of
163

his still-saddened friends were shocked by an unexpected devel-
opment: Hutton’s illegitimate son, also named James Hutton,arrived in Edinburgh to announce his existence. Even Black,who knew Hutton better than anyone, was stunned. The secondJames Hutton, now about fifty years old, had lived in London allhis life; he was married and had five grown children. There isevidence that Hutton had occasionally sent his son money , butno indication that he had ever met his grandchildren, and he didnot provide for any of them upon his death. It is a testament toHutton’s friends, if not to him, that Black, Playfair, and otherslooked after Hutton’s grandchildren after his death. In fact, oneof the grandchildren was a motivated student, and Playfair sawto it that he was admitted into the University of Edinburgh.
Though Hutton’s personal affairs were in disarray , the same
could not be said of his intellectual pursuits. By 1797, he hadpublished two of three planned volumes of the Theory of the
Earth. The unpublished third volume would have been wel-
comed, for the draft manuscript contained passages about hisdiscoveries at Glen Tilt, Arran, and Siccar Point. But it washardly necessary . The doctor had completed all the needed field-work, and Clerk, Playfair, and Hall were his witnesses. He hadpublished his theory three times: the Abstract in 1785, the longpaper in the T ransactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in1788, and the two volumes of Theory of the Earth in 1795. And
he had also published a short piece on granite in 1790. He nodoubt died feeling that his theory and legacy were secure.
The critics were still hounding him, of course. Y et, he had
dispatched Richard Kirwan at length in the 1795 book. And1 6 4 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

though an old nemesis, Jean André De Luc (1727–1817), reap-
peared to attack Hutton’s two volumes in a series of articles pub-lished in 1796 and 1797, he seemed merely to parrot Kirwan.De Luc was from Geneva, but had lived in London since theearly 1770s. He was a respected member of the Royal Society ,and his aim, like Kirwan’s, was to reconcile Genesis and geology .In his critique, he charged Hutton with crediting the Deity forthe outlandish processes that “he has himself devised against theMosaic account of the earth.” De Luc’s own theory was relatedto W erner’s. He imagined that there had been six major epochsin the earth’s history , correlating to the six days of creation, andthat huge cavities in the earth had caused massive collapses,which in turn had led to dramatic recessions of the universalocean and odd formations on the surface of the earth.
Kirwan and De Luc were respected geologists, and though
their attacks were spirited, they were also old-fashioned andsteeped in religion; they did not seriously engage with Hutton’srigorous scientific assertions. Had De Luc been the last to takeon Hutton, his friends could have rested easy . But a new foeappeared right before Hutton died—the most talented anddetermined of them all. He would engage with Hutton’s scien-
tific assertions. T o add insult to injury , this new enemy livedright in Hutton’s backyard—and he was a mere child. RobertJameson was yet another Edinburgh native and student from theUniversity of Edinburgh who, at twenty-two years old, pre-sented a paper at the Royal Medical Society (in Edinburgh)titled “Is the Huttonian Theory of the Earth Consistent withFact?” As the title makes clear, the 1796 article was a direct165 HUTTON’S BOSWELL’S

attack on Hutton’s theory . Where and why the young Jameson
developed his anti-Hutton sentiment are not documented.However, it is probable that it started at the university , in JohnW alker’s classroom. As a student, Jameson had become the pro-tégé of the increasingly infirm W alker, who gave him responsi-bility for the day-to-day running of the Museum of NaturalHistory while Jameson was still an undergraduate. A convert tothe W ernerian viewpoint, Jameson was determined to proveHutton wrong once and for all.
Unlike his mentor, who never seemed to finish the books he
was supposedly writing, Jameson was prolific. Following the1796 paper, he traveled to Ireland to meet Richard Kirwan. Stillonly twenty-four years old, he published his first book, An Out-
line of the Mineralogy of the Shetland Islands, and of the Island ofArran, in 1798. Arran was one of the areas that Hutton had vis-
ited during his granite-finding trips of 1785–1787, and Jamesondeliberately chose to visit it to provide a different interpretation.T wo years later, he published a prodigious  two-volume booktitled Mineralogy of Scotland. The book contained impressive
scholarship, and it applied the W ernerian viewpoint to the geol-ogy of Scotland.
After writing two books and one article, all aimed at dis-
proving Hutton and reinstating W erner and W alker, Jamesondecided to travel to Freiberg to study at the feet of the masterhimself. He left for Saxony in September 1800, and studied withW erner for one year. He returned to Edinburgh more committedthan ever; and now that W alker’s health was in tatters, Jamesonwas named his assistant. When W alker died in 1803, the world’s1 6 6 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

most accomplished pro-W ernerian and anti-Huttonian geologist
became a formal colleague of Playfair’s and the next geologyprofessor at the University of Edinburgh.
John Playfair watched these developments with alarm. As
early as 1796, the year Jameson’s first paper was published, herecognized that Jameson was a potential threat to all that Huttonhad worked so hard to accomplish. Moreover, Playfair was notconvinced that Hutton’s book had adequately confronted evenKirwan and De Luc. As evidence of how much work was left tobe done, the already influential Encyclopedia Britannica, in its
third edition of 1797, devoted twelve double-column pages tochallenging Hutton’s 1788 paper: “Thus we have seen, that,contrary to our author’s hypothesis, the world has undoubtedlyhad a beginning; that our dry land has not, for ages, been thebottom of the sea; that we may reasonably suppose the deluge tohave been the cause of all or most of the fossil appearance ofs h e l l ,  b o n e s ,  &  c . ,  w e  m e e t  w i t h  ...”
Who would lead the counterattack? Joseph Black had nei-
ther the strength nor energy . John Clerk was the same age asBlack and also in declining health. James W att was busy makinghistory in his own right, and had not stayed close to Hutton inhis later years. In the end, Playfair knew that he and Hall wouldneed to safeguard their friend’s work. It appears that both menwere motivated to play these roles because of the importance ofthe scientific questions, which they recognized as among themost intriguing in the waning years of the eighteenth century . Atthe same time, their affection for Hutton was unmistakable.Soon after Hutton’s death, Playfair visited Arran, and he wrote167 HUTTON’S BOSWELL’S

to Hall from there: “The junctions I saw were I believe all visited
by Dr. H. At one of them I could see the marks of his hammer,(or at least I thought so), and could not without emotion thinkof the enthusiasm with which he must have viewed it. I wasnever more sensible of the truth of what I remember you saidone day when we were looking at the Dykes in the water at Leithsince the Dr.’s death, ‘that these phenomena had now lost halftheir value.’”
As a first step, Playfair decided to write a memoir of Hutton
for the Royal Society of Edinburgh, similar to one he had writ-ten for Matthew Stewart ten years earlier (Stewart was the math-ematician who assumed Maclaurin’s chair after his death; hedied in 1785, when Playfair took his position). While sorting
through Hutton’s papers, Playfair realized how much materialhad been committed to manuscript but never published. Also,shortly after he began the memoir, Jameson’s book about Arranappeared. That book, combined with Playfair’s fear that Hut-ton’s 1795 Theory of the Earth—written while Hutton was tor-
mented by intense pain—was not as strong as it could have been,caused Playfair to take an unprecedented step. He decided thathe would write a new book about Hutton’s theory . Thus, heembarked on Illustrations of the Huttonian Theory of the Earth.
Other scholars have extended a predecessor’s works before andsince, but usually the new effort is presented as an original work.The title alone demonstrates that Playfair’s goal was remarkablyhonorary; he was simply clarifying what his friend had alreadyproved. In the preface to his book, Playfair wrote, with his usualmodesty , 1 6 8 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

Having been instructed by Dr. Hutton himself in his theory
of the earth; having lived in intimate friendship with thatexcellent man for several years, and almost in the daily habitof discussing the questions here treated of; I have had theopportunity of understanding his views and becomingacquainted with his peculiarities, whether of expression or ofthought. In the other qualifications necessary for the illustra-tion of a system so extensive and various, I am abundantlysensible of my deficiency , and shall therefore, with great def-erence, and considerable anxiety , wait the decision fromwhich there is no appeal.
Playfair’s book was published in 1802. Over 500 pages, but
with a relatively large typeface and small page size, the book did
not feel long, especially when compared to Hutton’s lengthy twovolumes. The layout itself was clever. The first part, less than 150pages, was a distillation of the Huttonian theory and focused onstratified rocks, their consolidation and position on the surfaceof the earth, intrusive igneous veins, granite, the system of strati-fied rocks and igneous rocks, and what it all meant for the reno-vation of the earth. The next 400 pages consisted of separatechapters organized under the heading “Notes and Additions.” Arepresentative chapter was titled “Origin of Coal”; another was“Rivers and Lakes.” These chapters demonstrated just how wellJames Hutton had taught geology to the mathematician; theyalso showed how widely read in geology Playfair had become.The chapters were filled with specific examples from all over theworld, most coming from other writers, although Playfair had169 HUTTON’S BOSWELL’S

been doing geologic fieldwork around Scotland in preparation
for writing the book (he mainly revisited the major locales ofHutton’s 1785–1788 excursions). The last part of Illustrationsaddressed the various criticisms that had surfaced over the years.Playfair never mentioned Jameson by name, but he did explicitlydirect comments to W erner, Kirwan, and De Luc.
Illustrations of the Huttonian System was successful. It was
published in London and Edinburgh simultaneously , and it cer-tainly attracted a wider readership than Hutton’s final work(which went through only one 500-copy printing). Playfair’snephew later wrote (in 1822), “With what success [ Illustra-
tions ] was attended we may judge from the fame and credit
which have been attained by the theory , which, but for its com-mentary , seemed likely to be known only through the erroneousstatement of its opponents.”
James Hall performed a function just as important as Playfair’s.
Seeing Siccar Point with the doctor in 1788 had been a key turn-
ing point for Hall. From then on, he was a disciple of Hutton’sand he wanted to help confirm his old friend’s theory . Theyoung aristocrat was a talented chemist, and in the early 1790she asked Hutton whether he could perform some experimentson basalt. For reasons not altogether clear, Hutton thought thatany such experiment would be fruitless and urged Hall not tobother. Hall did not agree, but he did not want to openly dis-obey Hutton, so he waited.
Following Hutton’s death, Hall saw no reason to wait any
longer. The existence of subterranean heat remained a controver-1 7 0 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

sial topic, and Hall believed that he had a way to prove its existence
through chemistry . Jameson, Kirwan, De Luc, and W erner himselfall claimed that basalt—what we now know to be an igneous rocklike granite—was a Primary rock, and therefore among the oldeston the planet. Hutton was convinced that it was fresh molten rockinjected into older strata. The W ernerians proved their contentionby pointing out that basalt, when heated and cooled in experi-ments, turned to glass, not the crystalline rocks that appeared innature. Therefore, basalt must be a precipitate, formed in the uni-versal ocean. It is important to remember that the followers ofW erner merely had to prove that the upstart Hutton was wrongbecause he was confronting their established theory .
Hall had an ingenious idea: What if the heated basalt was
cooled only very slowly , as would probably happen within theearth, where Hutton reasoned that basalt formed? Hall collectedfifteen separate samples of basalt from Scotland, England, andthe Continent, heated them to very high temperatures, and thenlet them cool slowly . Sure enough, the basalts re-formed as crys-tals, not glass. With Hall’s connections in Paris and at the RoyalSociety in London, word of the experiments spread through thegeology community and were quickly recognized as significant.However, the resulting crystals still did not look like their parentrocks (the basalts needed to cool much more slowly than Hallhad allowed). Therefore, though this experiment proved theW ernerians were wrong in believing that basalts always cooledinto glass, it did not conclusively prove Hutton correct.
But Hall’s next experiment would do just that. It would
take about six years to complete and it is now considered the171 HUTTON’S BOSWELL’S

beginning of experimental geology . Hall’s goal was to prove that
limestone would not disintegrate if heated under great pres-sure. Recall that Joseph Black had discovered carbon dioxideby heating types of limestone; his specimens lost nearly halftheir weight when heated, and he was then able to prove thatwhat was lost was carbon dioxide. So this was well known. Andit was precisely what critics pointed to when Hutton arguedthat subterranean heat caused sediments to consolidate: If lime-stone, one of the most common of all stratified rocks, becamecompletely transformed when heated, how could heat be the“mineralizing” factor? Hutton had argued that pressure keptthe components together and prevented disintegration, but thishad not been proved.
Hall performed over 500 experiments designed to prove that
limestone did not disintegrate when heated, as it does on earth,
as long as there was enough pressure to hold it together. He hadto design every facet of the experiment because nothing like ithad ever been attempted. In addition, he had to assemble his owninstruments and equipment, which included a special  high-temperature thermometer, and gun barrels (at the time, the onlyobjects built to withstand high pressure). Hall placed the rocks inthe gun barrels, heated them to tremendously high temperatures,and then measured the loss of weight. In his most successfulexperiments, with the heat as high as 1,000 degrees Celsius andpressure measurements equivalent to a column of salt water2,700 meters (almost 2 miles) high, the minerals lost essentiallyno weight. This was a triumphant result.
Hall’s new success was again widely publicized. His reputa-
tion as a careful chemist meant that the results were taken seri-1 7 2 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

ously . Unfortunately , because of their complexity , the experi-
ments were nearly impossible for others to replicate, so theycould not be independently confirmed. Until similar resultswere achieved by others, and they finally were decades later,Hall’s findings could not be considered unassailable. Clearly ,there was more work to do.
Playfair’s Illustrations of the Huttonian Theory of the Earth
was published in 1802, and Hall’s limestone experiments were
completed in 1804–1805. These two men had done more thananyone could ask to protect another’s legacy . And for most of thefirst decade of the nineteenth century , it looked as though theHuttonians had won the battle against the W ernerians. ButW erner’s advocates were simply too numerous and determinedfor Playfair and Hall to withstand for long. W erner lived until1817, teaching his course regularly and creating new apostleseach time. Robert Jameson was probably even more instrumen-tal in keeping W erner’s ideas predominant. He was the only pro-fessor at the University of Edinburgh teaching the geologycourse, and it was the largest course of its type in the world.Records of the period show that he taught between 50 and 100students each year (W erner taught only about 20 annually), cre-ating a small army of W ernerians by the end of the term. Rub-bing salt into the wound, Jameson did more than espouse thetenets of W erner’s system; he also took pains to criticize Hut-ton’s system at every turn. In addition to his teaching, Jamesonpublished his most successful book yet in 1808. Titled Elements
of Geognosy, this technical book was the most scholarly andrefined presentation of Abraham W erner’s system.173 HUTTON’S BOSWELL’S

Although the tension in Edinburgh was palpable, the geolog-
ical community in England officially turned its collective back on
the controversy . The French Revolution had created a tremen-dous backlash of conservatism in England that started in the early1790s and continued for several decades. The conservatismspread in all directions, infecting even the sciences. Kirwan andDe Luc’s critiques of Hutton were emblematic of this backlash.Then, in 1807, the prominent geologists of England founded theGeological Society of London. The founders of this body wereweary of the Hutton/W erner debate and essentially told theirmembers that the field needed facts and observations, not theo-ries. The purpose of their society would be to provide the neededfacts. Therefore, the society encouraged and supported specificand detailed investigations of geological formations.
In 1808, the same year that Jameson’s book appeared, a
development on the Continent complicated the picture. T woprominent French scientists, Georges Cuvier and AlexandreBrongniart, presented a paper that summarized the results oftheir close examination of the strata around Paris. They had dis-covered something puzzling: Nine distinct episodes had beenrevealed in the strata. Most significantly , the fossils found in thestrata alternated between saltwater and freshwater organisms.The collaborators were followers of W erner, but this discoveryshook their belief in his system. W erner’s universal ocean hadreceded only once, so the alternation between salt and fresh waterwas impossible. But this had certainly occurred around Paris.
When Cuvier published his book on the joint Cuvier/
Brongniart research in 1812, he presented a new theory in1 7 4 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

which the earth had been beset by a series of catastrophic floods,
at least six times in its history . These catastrophes accounted forthe otherwise unexplainable strata around Paris. But the previ-ous deluges had occurred so far in the past that they could notbe analyzed or otherwise investigated. Cuvier wrote that it wasnot possible to “explain the more ancient revolutions of theglobe by means of still existing causes ....  The thread of opera-
tion is here broken, the march of nature is changed, and none ofthe agents that she now employs were sufficient for her ancientworks.” This view soon became known as Catastrophism.Because Cuvier argued that “the thread of operation is here bro-ken,” he did not attempt to address the question of how old theearth was.
The irrepressible Robert Jameson quickly translated
Cuvier’s book into English. The Jameson edition was widelyread, going through five editions from 1813 to 1827. Jamesonwas able to overlook the problems that the book presented forstrict W ernerism, the most significant being that it dramaticallyaltered the original concept of one, and only one, universalocean. The crucial factor, in Jameson’s eyes, was that Cuvieremphasized that the final catastrophe was the source of theearth’s current geology . This final deluge could be interpreted asthe universal ocean. Furthermore, Cuvier’s contention that thetype and scale of the earth’s operations in the past were differentfrom forces currently at work was in direct opposition to theideas Hutton and his followers had proposed.
While Cuvier’s work was energizing the W ernerians, James
Hall inadvertently contributed to the obscuring of Hutton’s175 HUTTON’S BOSWELL’S

vision. One part of Hutton’s theory that troubled him was its
inability to explain the appearance of huge boulders (callederratics by geologists) in various parts of Europe. Hall came to
believe that tsunamis—overwhelming tidal waves—might be thecause (Hall even placed dynamite under water to see whether hecould create small-scale tsunamis for study; in the end, all hecreated were big splashes of water). He was particularly certainthat something like a tidal wave must have crossed Scotland,from Glasgow to Edinburgh. The erratics that Hall was trying toexplain had actually been transported by glaciers. They wereremnants of the last ice age. Nonetheless, his 1815 article, “Onthe Revolutions of the Earth’s Surface,” appeared to some read-ers to question the fundamental Huttonian belief in slow andcontinuous action of everyday geologic processes.
The year 1815 also marked the end of the Napoleonic W ars
in Europe. T oward the end of that year, John Playfair embarked ona lengthy tour of Europe in preparation for a second edition ofIllustrations, a revision that was going to be a thorough reworking
of the material. So much had occurred since 1802—the matura-tion of Playfair’s own ideas, Hall’s seminal experiments, Cuvier’simportant discoveries in Paris and his theory of catastrophism toexplain them, and even Jameson’s specific contributions—that theplanned revision would likely be an entirely new book.
He spent seventeen months on the Continent and traveled
all over France, Switzerland, and Italy , covering more than 4,000miles. Back in Edinburgh in the middle of 1817, the writing ofthe second edition was interrupted by an invitation from the edi-tors of the Encyclopedia Britannica to write a comprehensive1 7 6 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

review article on the state of the mathematical and physical sci-
ences for one of their supplements. This was an offer the math-ematician could not refuse, and he enthusiastically took up thechallenge. The second edition would have to wait a few months.
Sadly , the second edition never appeared. In fact, it was
never even begun. Soon after completing the first draft of thearticle for Britannica in mid-1818, Playfair began to suffer from
a “disease of the bladder” that nearly incapacitated him. Overtime, he recovered somewhat, only to have the disease returnwith a vengeance in June 1819. One month later, John Playfairwas dead at the age of seventy-one.
In 1822, his nephew , James Playfair, wrote a memorial, simi-
lar to the one John Playfair had written for Hutton in 1805. Onetelling passage shows the perilous state that Hutton’s theory ofthe earth was in now that its leading expositor was deceased: 
It has been said that the illustration of a theory of the earth
was but a profitless employment for so accurately thinking aphilosopher, and that the task aught have been left to moreimaginative minds, whose speculations would have affordedequal pleasure to those who delight in forming fabrics of the-ory on insufficient foundations. It is true that even the lucidcommentary of Playfair does not establish the Huttonian as ageneral and undeviating theory , in an undoubted and indis-putable situation.
From a close relative, this was hardly an endorsement for a body
of work that so dominated the energy of John Playfair.177 HUTTON’S BOSWELL’S

At the beginning of the 1820s, then, with Jameson still very
active at the University of Edinburgh, Cuvier in his prime in
Paris, and James Hall getting on in years, there was little hopethat James Hutton’s theory of the earth would ever becomewidely accepted. It would take another rigorous thinker—froman entirely new generation—to embrace the undeniable logicbehind the ideas and recognize Hutton’s true brilliance.1 7 8 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

10
The Huttonian Revolution 
I had brought with me the first volume of Lyell’s 
Principles of Geology, which I studied attentively; and this 
book was of the highest service to me in many ways.
Charles Darwin, 1876
In the fall of 1824, the elderly James Hall (now sixty-three
years old) hosted a young geologist by the name of Charles
Lyell for several days at his estate in Dunglass. Lyell wasreturning to London after several weeks of research in an areanorth of Edinburgh. Hall so enjoyed the young man’s knowl-edge and enthusiasm that he even took him by boat to see Sic-car Point, just the way he, Hutton, and Playfair had seen it. Infact, Hall was now about the same age that Hutton had been,and Lyell the same age as Hall, on that exciting day in 1788.Siccar Point worked its magic again—just as Hall had been
179

converted to Huttonianism years before, Lyell was poised to
become a believer.
Charles Lyell (1797–1875) was destined to be connected to
James Hutton. He was brought into the world only eight monthsafter the doctor’s death and within 20 miles of Glen Tilt. Thoughborn in Scotland, Charles grew up in southern England, the old-est child of a wealthy family . He had a pleasant and comfortablechildhood, in which he developed a keen interest in nature. In1816, the eighteen-year-old Lyell prepared to enter Exeter Collegeat Oxford University . During the summer of that year, the inquisi-tive youth read Robert Bakewell’s Introduction to Geology, a pop-
ular text published in 1815. Bakewell discussed Hutton’s theoryand his idea that the earth was indefinitely old, but the bookendorsed a theory that was a refinement of W erner’s scheme; it fea-tured the universal ocean, Primary/T ransitional/Secondary rocks,and a young earth that had experienced catastrophic changes dur-ing its short history . Though he entered Oxford to study thehumanities and work toward a career in law , Lyell was drawn togeology , thanks to Bakewell’s book. Once at Oxford, a new inspi-ration took over: one of the most dynamic professors who evertaught there, William Buckland (1784–1856).
The Oxford professor was a fascinating character, and in
many ways he represented the state of geology , at least in En -gland, at the start of Lyell’s career. Buckland was among the half-dozen natural philosophers who founded the GeologicalSociety of London in 1807. That learned body was decidedlyanti-theory , committed to gathering solid information about spe-cific geological facts, formations, and processes.1 8 0 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

William Buckland did not quite follow that creed. A very
devout man, he had developed his own theory of the earth,
which was related to W erner’s and Cuvier’s. His theory becameinfluential because he was the first academic geologist in En -gland, and he was the first to teach a geology course at an En -glish university (the topic having been taught in Edinburghsince 1781). Buckland’s theory was a safe synthesis of Cuvier’sand W erner’s work; he argued that the Deluge, which hadoccurred when biblical scholars said it did, about 5,000 yearsago, had formed the earth that we now inhabit, and that noth-ing dramatic had happened since then. Thus W erner’s theoryof a universal ocean and the precipitation of existing land fromit still held. But according to Buckland, who took his cue fromCuvier, Noah’s Flood had been but the last of several huge con-vulsions of the earth. The previous disturbances were impossi-ble to understand or to investigate, so it was not worth evendwelling on them. Only God knew what had occurred. Buck-land would write in 1820:
Again the grand fact of a universal deluge at no very remote
period is proved on grounds so decisive and incontrovert-ible, that, had we never heard of such an event from Scrip-ture, or any other authority , Geology of itself must have calledin the assistance of some such catastrophe, to explain thephenomena of diluvian action which are universally pre-sented to us, and which are unintelligible without recourse toa deluge exerting its ravages at a period not more ancient thanthat announced in the Book of Genesis.181 THE HUTTONIAN REVOLUTION

Lyell was well exposed to Buckland’s thinking, taking three
courses from him, one each spring from 1817 to 1819. Buckland
recognized his student’s ability as a scholar, and the two of themwould remain friends for years.
After finishing at Oxford in the spring of 1819, Lyell moved
to London to study law at Lincoln’s Inn, but he also continuedto investigate geology . He immediately became a fellow of boththe Geological Society and the Linnean Society , thanks to theenthusiastic recommendation of his Oxford professor. In early1820, severe vision problems forced Lyell to take a leave ofabsence from his legal studies. For a diversion, he accompaniedhis father on a visit to Europe that summer. This was his secondtrip to the Continent. During the first one, taken with his entirefamily in 1818, he had seen Paris; this second tour took himthrough the Alps and most of Italy , where he observed inspiringgeology . From this point on, a series of events was going to setLyell on a collision course with his friend and teacher Buckland.
One year after seeing the Alps and volcanoes of Italy , in
October 1821, the always-inquisitive Lyell happened to visitGidean Mantell, a surgeon who was famous in southeast En -gland for his interest in fossils. Mantell lived at Lewes, in Sus-sex—in a part of England dominated by massive chalk hills, theSouth Downs. Beneath the chalk, which is a limestone known tobe formed in a deep-sea, saltwater environment, Mantell hadfound something curious. He had discovered the fossils ofnumerous land plants, land vertebrates, and freshwater shells, allbelow the chalk. Mantell concluded that the formation he was
exploring was an ancient river delta that had later been sub-1 8 2 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

merged by the sea and remained there long enough to be cov-
ered by layers of chalk hundreds of feet thick. Then the entireformation had been raised above the sea, and the chalk andunderlying sandstone eroded away to reveal the remains of theriver delta as stratified rocks. Such a phenomenon could not beexplained by W erner’s theory , but it could be explained by Hut-ton’s, where just such a succession was predicted. As one Lyellscholar has commented, “By providing clear evidence of down-ward and upward movements of the land, the strata supportedHuttonian geology rather than the W ernerian view .”
Lyell started doing his own research in the area, broadening
his scope to include the Isle of Wight. In 1822–1823 he con-firmed for himself the same succession of events that Mantellhad discovered. An admirable characteristic of Lyell’s was thatthroughout his career he tried to see and confirm, firsthand,exposures that others had seen before him. Lyell brought Buck-land with him to the Isle of Wight in early1823, and just as hisconfidence in past ideas was wavering, so, too, was his confi-dence in the abilities of his old teacher. Lyell wrote: “I shouldhave been at a loss to conceive how so much blundering couldhave arisen [in Buckland’s research] if I had not witnessed thehurried manner in which Buckland galloped over the ground.”
The next big shake-up of Lyell’s beliefs occurred in the
summer of 1823. Now a practicing lawyer, Lyell traveled toParis as a representative of the Geological Society to meet withhis French counterparts. Here he met the father of catas -trophism, the renowned Georges Cuvier. He also becamefriends with Constant Prevost, who would play a major role in183 THE HUTTONIAN REVOLUTION

his future thinking. Prevost showed him some outcrops near
the city that demonstrated a process of freshwater-saltwateralternation, similar to what Mantell and Lyell had found insouthern England. What made these formations even moreinteresting than the English ones, though, was that evidencefrom the fossils showed that at one point the two environmentshad mixed together at the same time. The saltwater seas that
eventually overwhelmed the freshwater formation had coveredthe area only very gradually . Prevost believed that Cuvier’scatastrophes were not needed to explain the past in this part ofthe Paris Basin. Sussex and the Isle of Wight had disprovedW erner’s universal ocean, since W erner’s ocean retreated onlyonce. Perhaps Cuvier’s and Buckland’s catastrophes were notneeded to explain the geological changes of the past either.
Fittingly , the discovery that turned Lyell away from catas -
trophism once and for all occurred in Scotland, near Glen Tilt.In the summer of 1824, Lyell went back to his birthplace, Kin-nordy , to do research at a marl pit there. T wo small lakes, LochsBakie and Kinnordy , had been drained for marl, which was stillused as fertilizer, just as it was in Hutton’s farming days. The drylakes revealed freshwater limestones, similar to those that Lyellhad seen in the Paris basin, and they contained beautifully pre-served freshwater fossils. The lakes in Scotland had onlyrecently been drained, and they were clearly modern, geologi-cally speaking. Cuvier had argued that the Paris freshwater lime-stones were formed only in the deep past, and could not occurin the modern age. Lyell had just found that Cuvier was wrong—a previously supposed ancient process had occurred recently .1 8 4 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

After he had finished his work in Kinnordy and was on his
way back to London, Lyell paid his visit to James Hall. Since
first visiting with Mantell three years earlier, Lyell’s belief inBuckland’s synthesis of W erner and Cuvier had been shaken.Now he had met the last of the great Huttonians and seen theone-of-a-kind unconformity at Siccar Point. It is not knownwhen Lyell first read Playfair’s Illustrations, but now he cer-
tainly picked up the book again. 
After the 1824 excursion to Scotland, Lyell returned to Lon-
don, and remained there for an extended period. Over the next
few years he did a great deal of writing, and his articles started toreflect his changing views. In 1826, Lyell published an importantseries of articles that focused on his work in southern Englandand Scotland. In the last of the three he stated, after discussingevidence from Chile that an earthquake had caused the land torise significantly above sea level: “No one can reflect on the abovestatement without being tempted to inquire whether the causesnow in action are, as Dr. Buckland has supposed, ‘the last expir-ing efforts of those mighty disturbing forces which once oper-ated,’ or whether as Hutton thought, they would still be sufficientin a long succession of ages to reproduce analogous results.”
The stage was now set for the complete transformation of
Lyell from a Cuvier skeptic to a Huttonian convert. Lyell wouldat last be won over after learning firsthand about the power ofvolcanoes, a phenomenon that Hutton had avoided because ofthe W ernerians’ preemptive claims that they were strictly shal-low surface events (that is, coal or some other volatile mineral185 THE HUTTONIAN REVOLUTION

just under the surface of the earth was somehow ignited). In
1827, Lyell asked the editor of the Quarterly Review to let him
review a new book by his friend George Scrope, titled Memoir
on the Geology of Central France. He was drawn to it because
Scrope focused on an area in south-central France that wasknown for its unusual geologic formations, such as cone-shapedhills and deep gorges cut by rivers. In his book, Scropedescribed a region that had experienced wave after wave of pastvolcanic activity . The formations could not be classified as eitherpre-Deluge or post-Deluge, as catastrophists would wish to do.The well-exposed outcrops, revealed by deeply cutting, fast-flowing rivers, showed a regular pattern of lava flows, layers ofriver gravel, then more lava flows, then more gravel layers, and soon. The successive layers of basaltic lava and gravel were notdeformed and there was little doubt about the order in whichthe volcanic eruptions had occurred.
Scrope went on to present a hypothesis. He believed it was
probable that volcanic activity not only raised land, but that italso caused land nearby to subside later, after the intense magmaactivity ceased. The seesawing earth could provide a hint forhow the freshwater-saltwater alternation might have occurred inthe Paris Basin.
Shortly after reading Scrope’s book, Lyell set out to explore
the Auvergne region of south-central France himself. He arrivedthere in May 1828, and was soon able to confirm all that Scropehad observed, even extending the analysis by more accuratelysequencing the past volcanic activity . From central France, Lyellcontinued on to Italy—the country of choice for a geologist1 8 6 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

recently convinced that volcanoes held the key to a theory . Once
in Italy , it did not take Lyell long to find what he was looking for.He triumphantly wrote to his sister from Naples: “I will let theworld know that the whole Isle of Isk, as the natives call it, hasrisen from the sea 2,600 feet since the Mediterranean was peo-pled with the very species of shell-fish which have now thehonor of living with, or being eaten by , us—our common oysterand cockle amongst the rest.”
Essentially , what Lyell had found was more dramatic proof
of the uplift of stratified rocks that Hutton had postulated in1785. Hutton had needed only to see veined granite at GlenTilt; Lyell needed to see something more dramatic—evidencethat the strata had been raised half a mile in a relatively shortamount of time. Regardless, Lyell left Italy shortly afterward andreturned to England to continue work on the book he hadstarted before his trip.
T ruly inspired by what he had seen and learned on the Con-
tinent, Lyell finished the first volume of his book in about oneyear. V olume 1 of the Principles of Geology, Being an Attempt to
Explain the Former Changes of the Earth’s Surface, by Referenceto Causes Now in Operation was published in London in July
1830. T wo more volumes would follow , in 1832 and 1833. Thebook, using Hutton and Playfair as starting points, and theneffectively synthesizing a huge body of work, became the defin-ing book for the still-young field of geology . For at least the next100 years, Principles of Geology would be the standard reference
for students and researchers of geology . Comparable to AdamSmith’s Wealth of Nations in its importance and immediate187 THE HUTTONIAN REVOLUTION

impact, it would go through five editions in the 1830s, and
eleven editions overall during the author’s lifetime. Most impor-tant, it finally , and firmly , established the earth as immeasurablyancient.
The importance of Lyell’s Principles of Geology was not lost
on Charles Darwin, who brought a copy with him aboard the
Beagle, the research vessel that would be his home from 1832 to1836. He was given a copy of the first volume as a gift from oneof his Cambridge University professors before the ship set sail,and he decided to read it before they reached the first destina-tion on the itinerary . On the fourth page of the 500-plus-pagebook, Lyell introduced his readers to James Hutton, stating thatHutton was the first scholar to treat geology as its own subject,and the first to separate it from cosmogonies. “His doctrine onthis (point) was vehemently opposed at first, and although it hasgradually gained ground, and will ultimately prevail, it is yet farfrom being established,” said Lyell. Then, after reviewing thetheories and discoveries of previous thinkers in geology , theauthor stated that “[Hutton] was the first . . . to explain the for-mer changes of the earth’s crust, by reference exclusively to nat-ural agents. Hutton labored to give fixed principles to geology , asNewton had succeeded in doing to astronomy .” Finally , Darwinarrived at the key passage:
If any one ventured to doubt the possibility of our being
enabled to carry back our researches to the creation of thepresent order of things, the granitic rocks were triumphantly1 8 8 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

appealed to. On them seemed written in legible characters,
the memorable inscription Dinanzi a me non fur cose createse non eterne, and no small sensation was excited when Hut-ton seemed, with unhallowed hand, desirous to erase charac-ters already regarded by many as sacred. “In the economy ofthe world,” said the Scotch geologist, “I can find no traces ofa beginning, no prospect of an end;” and the declaration wasthe more startling when coupled with the doctrine, that allpast changes on the globe had been brought about by theslow agency of existing causes. The imagination was firstfatigued and overpowered by endeavoring to conceive theimmensity of time required for the annihilation of whole con-tinents by so insensible a process.
Charles Lyell’s book went on, in beautifully written detail, to
prove this statement.
Darwin did not know what to think. He knew all about Hut-
ton, but only as an object of ridicule. His first university geologyprofessor had scathingly criticized the Huttonian viewpoint,and of course the seventeen-year-old student had believed him.And just who was this teacher? None other than Robert Jame-son. For two years, from the fall of 1825 to the spring of 1827,Charles Darwin had attended the University of Edinburgh. Hisfather, who had received his medical degree there, pushedCharles and his older brother Erasmus to study medicine at thesame institution—Charles was to begin instruction and Erasmuswas to finish his. Darwin detested the lecture style of teachingpracticed at Edinburgh, and he would leave without a degree189 THE HUTTONIAN REVOLUTION

after two years. However, during those four semesters, he took
two courses that he later wrote about: Thomas Hope’s (JosephBlack’s successor) chemistry course and Robert Jameson’s geol-ogy course. Hope (1766–1844) had been friends with Hutton,Black, and Playfair, and he was a confirmed Huttonian. Hedevoted several weeks of his class to Hutton’s theory of theearth, and he showed how chemistry was a tool for its proof.
However, several weeks could not counterbalance Jame-
son, who had an entire course with which to indoctrinate stu-dents. Jameson, although a boring lecturer, was an enthusiasticand persuasive scholar in face-t o-face encounters. He urged his
students to spend three hours a week in the natural historymuseum looking at rock specimens (which Darwin enjoyed),and he often took his students into the field around Edinburgh.Darwin left this anecdote in his autobiography , written after hehad become a follower of Lyell/Hutton: “Equally striking is thefact that I, though now only sixty-seven years old, heard Pro-fessor Jameson, in a field lecture at Salisbury Crags . . . withvolcanic rocks all around us . . . say that it was a fissure filledwith sediment from above, adding with a sneer that there weremen who maintain that it had been injected from beneath in amolten condition.”
Clearly , as late as 1826, Jameson was teaching unrecon-
structed W ernerism, deliberately going to the very spot on Salis-bury Crags where Hutton had spent so many hours speculatingabout his theory , simply to deride him and promote the oppositeposition. The future father of evolution was one of 200 studentswho took Jameson’s course that term—its popularity had grown1 9 0 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

since the early 1800s. Darwin was even a regular guest at meet-
ings of Jameson’s W ernerian Society while at Edinburgh.
After leaving Edinburgh, Darwin was influenced by another
geologist whose beliefs also differed greatly from Lyell’s. AdamSedgwick (1785–1873) was the geologist at Cambridge Univer-sity , where Darwin matriculated next. Darwin never took hiscourse, but he did serve as his assistant on a three-week fieldexcursion to W ales during the late summer after he graduated in1831. This fieldwork was intended to prepare him for his natu-ralist’s duties on the Beagle, but he also received instruction in
catastrophist thinking. Sedgwick was not the proselytizer thatJameson was; as a member of the Geological Society of London,he was more interested in fact collecting than in theorizing.However, his fundamental beliefs were similar to those of hisOxford colleague, Buckland: that the earth had experienced asuccession of cataclysms, the last of which was Noah’s Flood—the cause of the geology all around them.
A week or so after Charles Darwin started reading the Prin-
ciples of Geology, the Beagle dropped anchor at the first port on
its itinerary , Porto Praya on the volcanic island of St. Jago in the
Cape V erde Island chain. The extinct volcanoes that formed theislands, possessions of the Portuguese government, were locatedabout 300 miles west of the North African coast. Though hilly ,the island appeared desolate and nondescript to Darwin at first.One reason he had taken the position as the ship’s naturalist wasto see the lush tropical paradises he had read about as a student.It did not appear that St. Jago was going to fulfill that desire.191 THE HUTTONIAN REVOLUTION

But it did fulfill his desire to see unusual sights. After several
days of exploring the exposed black landscape of the lava-
formed island, taking notes, and gathering specimens, Darwincame upon a beach, where he began collecting sponges andcorals. Some distance from the beach was a low but massive hill.On its face was a distinct white band at least 30 feet above theground. From where he stood, it looked as if a stripe had beenpainted across the exposed rocks. When he climbed the hill andgot on his hands and knees for a close look, Darwin discoveredthat the band consisted of shells and coral; they were so deli-cately preserved that they resembled the fresh ones he had justcollected. How on earth did this stratum of dead ocean life cometo be raised so gently 30 feet above the level of the waves?
The explanation could not be that the water level had fallen,
because though the white band was visible all along the shore,its height varied. Clearly the land had been raised up somewhatunevenly , and before it had been elevated the white band hadbeen the beach. Jameson would have had no reasonable expla-nation, and Sedgwick would have called on a past catastrophe toexplain it. But would not a catastrophe have destroyed the nearperfection preserved in this stratum? On the other hand, Lyell’sbook described processes whereby land was uplifted gently .Darwin later related that finding this particular spot on St. Jagowas a defining moment for him; the impressions formed therewould “never be effaced.” From this day on, Darwin believed inthe science of Lyell—which was based on the science of JamesHutton—a science that envisioned a dynamic yet ancient earth,constantly undergoing slow and subtle changes caused by the1 9 2 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

natural processes of erosion, tides, storms, volcanic eruptions,
earthquakes, tidal waves, and uplift due to subterranean heat.Darwin later wrote to one of his friends back in England that hehad “become a zealous disciple of Mr. Lyell’s views.”
From the day he found the white stratum on St. Jago, Dar-
win viewed the world differently . Nothing he saw during the restof his voyage caused him to doubt his new perspective. In fact,he was “tempted to carry parts to a greater extent, even than[Lyell] does.”
The Beagle continued its circumnavigation. Over the next
four and one-half years, Darwin would see most of the SouthernHemisphere, collecting bags full of specimens—animal, insect,plant, and mineral—and sending them on to England for analy-sis. The ship made stops at Brazil, Patagonia, and the FalklandIslands, sailed through the Straits of Magellan, and then on toChile. In Chile, Darwin crossed the Andes into Argentina. Fromthe west coast of South America, the Beagle then journeyed to
the Galapagos Islands, off the coast of Equador, and from thereacross the Pacific Ocean to T ahiti, New Zealand, Australia, andCape T own. The Beagle docked in Plymouth in October 1836,
the ship’s mission finally completed. 
It would soon become apparent that the most significant
stop made by the Beagle was the Galapagos Islands. Darwin was
there for over a month in the early autumn of 1835, and amongthe many specimens he collected were the different types offinches that he found on these tiny volcanic islands. Ninemonths later, the Galapagos were still on his mind; he wouldwrite in his diary , “When I see the islands in sight of each other193 THE HUTTONIAN REVOLUTION

and possessed of but a scanty stock of animals, tenanted by these
birds but slightly differing in structure and filling the same placein nature, I must suspect they are varieties . . . if there is theslightest foundation for these remarks, the zoology of the archi-pelagoes will be well worth examining: for such facts wouldundermine the stability of species.”
Back in England, it would not take long for those tiny birds
to start a scientific revolution. Darwin thought that they weresimply different varieties of the same species; but, as he did withall his collected specimens, he sent them to an expert for formalanalysis. John Gould (1804–1881), who was the taxidermist forthe Zoological Society , and known as one of the most carefulornithologists in England, took on the task. In March 1837,Gould told Darwin that the birds were not different varieties;they were different species. The importance of this finding was
not lost on anyone; there was even a front-page article in theLondon Times about it. For Darwin, Gould’s news was a bomb-
shell, as significant as the day on St. Jago when he became awareof the great age of the earth and its slow but constant changes.Now it was clear that animals, perhaps all life, also experiencedslow but constant changes, so much so that over time, animalsthat were separated from each other, as the finches on the Gala-pagos were, became distinct species. In July of that same year,Darwin started a new notebook with the heading “The T rans-mutation of Species.”
The third and last flash of insight for Darwin’s theory of
evolution occurred on September 28, 1838 (Darwin’s life is sowell documented, through his careful notes and diaries, his1 9 4 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

numerous letters, and his own autobiography , that we actually
have precise dates for these crucial turning points). On that day ,seeking relaxation from his intense studies, which were at feverpitch in the several years after the Beagle returned, Darwin read
a famous work that he had never read before: Thomas Mathus’sforty-year-old Essay on the Principle of Population (1798).  Dar-
win was having difficulty with the transmutation of species andhis thinking was stalled at the time because he could not devisean engine that drove the process, much as Hutton had at firststruggled to find a mechanism for the renovation of land. Dar-win already knew that different varieties of organisms were bornevery day , and that the variations were inheritable; that is, theywere passed down to offspring (biologists would not understandthe specifics of mutations and genetics until well into the twen-tieth century). For example, in the finch population on the Gala-pagos, every day a newborn appeared that had a slightly longerbeak than its parents, or slightly more colorful plumage, and thatnewborn would grow to be a reproducing adult whose own off-spring would also have the longer beak or more colorfulplumage.
Mathus now provided the reason why simple variation, over
time, meant new species: overpopulation. Because there was notenough food, shelter, and territory for every offspring of anorganism, there was competition among them for these scarcecommodities; the ones who were more able to acquire theseresources would be more likely to find a mate and reproducesuccessfully than the ones who were less able. If a variation suchas a longer beak, which gives the bird the ability to find and eat195 THE HUTTONIAN REVOLUTION

seeds found deeper in crevices, helped in the quest for more
resources, it would eventually be propagated through an entirepopulation. And over great expanses of time, if the populationbecame separated from others (as happened with the finches inthe Galapagos), these small changes would lead to separate pop-ulations that would no longer be able to reproduce with oneanother: new species.
Charles Darwin sketched out his theory of evolution in a 30-
page manuscript in 1842. Then he expanded this first effort intoa 200-page essay , copies of which he gave to only a handful of hisclosest friends, his scientific confidants, in 1844.
Though not one of Darwin’s confidants, Charles Lyell had
become a close friend of the naturalist soon after the Beagle
landed in England in 1836. Darwin’s letters from the ship to hiscolleagues in England generated tremendous interest among thescience community in London, and Lyell was the current star ofthat community , thanks to the impact of his book. Lyell called onDarwin soon after the Beagle landed, and the young man was
honored to be so well regarded by a fellow scientist whose workhe admired. Their friendship remained close for the rest of theirlives, even though for many years Lyell could not bring himselfto admit that natural selection led to the creation of new species;he finally did so in the tenth edition of Principles of Geology(1867–1868).
Nonetheless, Lyell played an integral role in the official
debut of the theory of evolution and the publication of Darwin’sOrigin of Species. On June 18, 1858, Darwin received a letter
and twenty-page paper from Alfred Russel W allace, a young nat-1 9 6 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

uralist with whom Darwin had been corresponding for several
years. W allace was hoping that Darwin would read the paperand then send it on to Charles Lyell to consider for publicationin the journal of the Linnean Society (Lyell was the president ofthat organization). T o Darwin’s shock and deep dismay , theenclosed paper was a sketch of a theory almost identical to Dar-win’s theory of evolution by natural selection. When he sent thepaper to Lyell, Darwin wrote, “If W allace had my MS sketchwritten out in 1842, he could not have made a better shortabstract.” Lyell and Darwin’s friend, the botanist JosephHooker, acting like King Solomon, together made one of the wis-est decisions in the history of science: They decided that W al-lace’s paper would be formally read along with one by Darwin(based on his 1844 treatise), thus guaranteeing that the two menwould receive joint credit for the discovery . On July 1, 1858,extracts from Darwin’s and then W allace’s papers were read toabout thirty members of the Linnean Society (Darwin was notpresent for the reading, his last child having died of scarlet feverjust three days before). Darwin’s secret theory was finally out; henow shared its authorship with W allace.
The theory of evolution by natural selection is today
thought of primarily as Charles Darwin’s because it is wellknown that he had distilled it fifteen years before W allace. But,more significantly , Darwin followed up the paper by quickly fin-ishing his On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection,
published in November 1859 (Darwin’s publisher was JohnMurray , who had also published Lyell’s book). Lyell acted asDarwin’s literary agent, and was one of perhaps a dozen men197 THE HUTTONIAN REVOLUTION

who read the book in proof sheets. Darwin had been working on
a book since 1856, but when W allace’s paper appeared, he real-ized that he was out of time. The book ended up much shorterthan Darwin first envisioned, which proved to be a blessing;unlike many treatises of the time, it was accessible and concise,and used only the best, most relevant examples. Every page inthe book was vivid and substantive.
Darwin was filled with anxiety and concern about the
book’s reception, but the day before it was released to the pub-lic he wrote to Lyell: “I have asked myself whether I may nothave devoted my life to a fantasy . Now I look at it as morallyimpossible that investigators of truth, like you ,...  c a n  b e  w h o l l y
wrong, and therefore I rest in peace.”
Charles Darwin need not have worried, for shock waves
produced by the book were immediate and lasting. The radicalimplications of The Origin of Species were soon felt in nearly
every field of intellectual inquiry , and they reverberate eventoday . The first and arguably most important insight for Darwinon his journey of discovery was that the earth was old beyondcalculation; how else would evolution have had time to work?And that is James Hutton’s ultimate contribution.1 9 8 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

Epilogue
The success of Lyell’s Principles of Geology was so pro-
nounced that the biblical geologists and catastrophists finally
threw in the towel. By the mid-1830s, Buckland had droppedhis dependence on the Deluge as an explanation for the earth’sgeologic formations. Even Jameson softened his positions, andhis later papers reflected his acceptance of the  Hutton-Lyellview . The Huttonian revolution was won, and the discipline ofgeology , finally freed from the blinkers of catastrophes, deluges,and universal oceans, could now get on with the difficult task ofdetermining just what had occurred over the incredible expanseof geologic time.
If the earth was not young, and if catastrophes did not
mask the past, was it possible to arrive at a figure for theearth’s age? James Hutton never attempted an estimate. Heknew that the means for projecting an accurate date did notexist; therefore to venture a guess was irresponsible. Besides,he was critical of theorists who tried to calculate the beginningof time, and he was determined not to fall into the same trap.
199

Charles Lyell followed his lead and steadfastly refused to com-
mit himself.
However, Lyell’s friend Charles Darwin did venture some-
thing that was perceived as a guess, and it caused him much moretrouble than it was worth. In the first edition of The Origin of
Species, while making a point about the vast amount of time
needed for even the most subtle of geologic changes, Darwin gaveas an example his calculation for how long it took to form theW eald V alley in the south of England. He incautiously wrote thatthe valley took approximately 300 million years to form. Witharmies of critics biting at Darwin’s heels, any assertion less thancompletely supported by hard facts was seized on as a weaknessin Darwin’s thinking. Several scholars felt that 300 million yearswas an absurdly high number, and they criticized Darwin for softthinking. Because this point was not essential to his arguments,Darwin dropped the estimate by the third edition of his book.
Just a few years after the initial publication of Darwin’s Ori-
gin, the first genuine attempt to calculate the age of the earth was
undertaken. Lord Kelvin, whose real name was William Thom-son (1824–1907), was the most famous and established physi-cist in the United Kingdom in the second half of the nineteenthcentury . He was born in Glasgow , where his father was a profes-sor of mathematics, and he studied math and physics at the Uni-versity of Glasgow while still quite young. By the age of twentyhe had finished his education and was already performing seri-ous science. One of his main interests was heat transfer, whichcaused him to investigate the exchange of heat between the Sunand the earth. He also became curious about the propagation ofheat from the center of the earth to the surface.2 0 0 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

Kelvin had a physicist’s arrogance, especially toward the
other sciences, and he found the thinking of the geology com-
munity to be less than rigorous. He especially objected to Hut-ton and Lyell’s conception of a steady-state, recycling earth,which was buttressed by unspecified chemical reactions in thecore of the planet. Exhaustively studying the laws of thermody-namics, he was convinced that the Sun and the earth were cool-ing at a rate that was constant, though currently unknowable, indirect opposition to what the geology community believed. Ifthe earth was cooling, then geologic processes would necessar-ily have been different in the past, with, for example, greaterrates of volcanism and more intense winds and storms. Thus,Hutton and Lyell’s belief in the constancy of geologic processeswould be wrong. As early as 1844, Kelvin had decided to try todetermine the age of the earth. In essence, he revisited Buffon,starting with the Frenchman’s idea that the earth had begun as amass of molten rock, and that the heat from that original moltenstate was slowly dissipating.
W orking on other projects for years, Kelvin was finally able
to announce his findings in 1862. He chose a locale guaranteedto ensure notice—the very scene of one of James Hutton’s tri-umphs, the Royal Society of Edinburgh (which by now hadmoved from the university to a beautiful building in New T own).In April of that year, Kelvin, now the physics professor at the Uni-versity of Glasgow , addressed the society , reading his paper “Onthe Secular Cooling of the Earth.” The thirty-eight-year-oldaggressively criticized the Huttonian view because it did notallow for his contention that the earth was cooling. After calcu-lating a rate of cooling and then extrapolating, Kelvin presented201 EPILOGUE

an age of between 20 million and 400 million years. Though the
speech was impressively technical, and the geologists in the audi-ence may have felt chastised, the wide range of ages did not provepersuasive. Revisiting the issue periodically , Kelvin consistentlybrought his estimate down, so that by the end of the 1880s, thebottom number, 20 million, had become Kelvin’s official calcula-tion. Kelvin was such a scientific titan that 20 million yearsbecame the accepted age of the earth. T wenty million became thenew 6,000—the age of the earth recognized by popular culture. 
Everything changed when Henri Becquerel discovered radi-
ation in his Paris lab in 1896. In an ingenious experiment, hetook sealed, unexposed photographic film and put it in a roomwith uranium, a mineral known to exhibit unusual properties.When the film was checked after several hours, it was completelyexposed, as if it had been left in the sunshine. Becquerel, and hislab assistants Marie and Pierre Curie, next sought to understandwhat had happened. They realized that certain elements are fun-damentally unstable, and this instability leads their isotopes (dif-ferent species of an element, the difference being the number ofneutrons) to undergo spontaneous decay , to break apart, and toultimately produce stable atoms, along with energy . This actionis known as radioactive decay , and a by-product is the escape ofthe energy . It was this energy that caused the exposure of the film.
The discovery of radioactivity galvanized the world of sci-
ence, and ambitious scientists everywhere began working in thefield. The next big breakthrough occurred in 1902, when ErnstRutherford and his colleague Frederick Soddy showed thatradioactive decay of a given element occurs at a constant rate,2 0 2 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

one that can be measured. It was not long before they realized
that the steady rate of radioactive decay could be used as a geo-logic clock to determine the age of the earth. In 1905, Ruther-ford delivered the Silliman Lectures at Y ale, and used the forumto challenge the science community to try to date the age of theearth using this new natural clock.
A chemist soon took up the Rutherford-Soddy challenge.
In 1907, Bertram Boltwood used the known rate of decay ofradium, combined with his discovery that uranium decays tolead, to come up with a range of 400 million to 2,200 millionyears for the age of the earth.
The next push to date the earth moved back to the United
Kingdom in the person of Arthur Holmes (1890–1965). Holmeswas a gifted student who had won a science scholarship to studyphysics at Imperial College in London. When his talents wererecognized by the physicist R. J. Strutt, Holmes was urged to stayon as a graduate student to work on the “age of the earth prob-lem.” Holmes followed Boltwood’s insight into the relationshipbetween uranium and lead, and came up with more refined num-bers. In 1913, and again in 1927, he published a popular bookon the age of the earth, in which he presented his calculation thatthe earth was 1.6 billion years old.
Through the 1930s and 1940s the work of Holmes, Alfred
Nier, E. Gerling, and F. Houtermans became more rigorous andprecise. These men, and many others, were now working pri-marily with common lead, and by the beginning of W orldW ar II, “isotope geologists” had now calculated the age of theearth to be at least 3.3 billion years.203 EPILOGUE

The final breakthrough came in the 1950s, when Claire Pat-
terson, of Caltech, realized that the only way to get a completely
accurate measurement of common lead decay was to leave theplanet, since the complicated mix of other elements in the earthdistorted any measurement attempt. He and his colleaguesdecided to focus on objects that were the same age as all theplanets in the solar system, including the earth, but allowed formore accurate lead decay calculations—meteorites. As ClairePatterson later related:
Lead in iron meteorites was the kind of lead that was in the
solar system when it was first formed, and . . . it was pre-served in iron meteorites without change from uraniumdecay , because there is no uranium in iron meteorites. ...I f
we only knew what the isotopic composition of primordiallead was in the earth when formed, we could take that num-ber and stick it into this marvelous equation that the atomicphysicists had worked out. And you could turn the crank andblip—out would come the age of the earth.
By 1956, Patterson had calculated the age of the earth to be
4.6 billion years, which remains the accepted age of our planet.
James Hutton was right—the earth is unfathomably old.
Why is it that James Hutton, the man who proved the earth’s
antiquity and made it possible for Claire Patterson to complete
his work, is essentially unknown to all but geologists? One reasonfor his relative invisibility is that geology has never been a partic-2 0 4 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

ularly flashy discipline. And it seems to have done an especially
poor job of publicizing its founding fathers, whereas other scien-tific fields have somehow pushed their pioneers into the popularconsciousness: Lavoisier in chemistry , Galileo and Newton inphysics, Darwin and Gregor Mendel in biology . However, thatcannot be the whole story because most people have at leastheard of Charles Lyell, the discipline’s other trailblazer.
Another reason is that the world’s attention was certainly
focused elsewhere when Hutton was first presenting and thendefending his theory . The American W ar of Independenceended in 1783, and the French Revolution began in 1789—twogalvanizing events that changed world history forever, and cer-tainly preoccupied the people who lived through the lastdecades of the eighteenth century , as well as future historians.Still, these two conflagrations did not prevent Adam Smith fromgaining the recognition he deserved.
One is left with the fact that James Hutton was not a gifted
communicator. Indeed, just about the only negative passage inPlayfair’s biography concerns Hutton’s writing: “The reasoningis sometimes embarrassed by the care taken to render it strictlylogical; and the transitions, from the author’s peculiar notions ofarrangement, are often unexpected and abrupt. These defectsrun more or less through all Dr. Hutton’s writings, and producea degree of obscurity astonishing to those who knew him, andheard him everyday converse with no less clearness and preci-sion than animation and force.”
The defective writing, coupled with the great pain Hutton
was suffering while working on his book, caused it to be put205 EPILOGUE

together in a hurried way . Not just long (approximately 1,200
pages over two volumes), The Theory of the Earth also con-
tained turgid passages from other works in other languages. Abook that unwieldy simply would not be read today , and it wasnot widely read then. One historian has determined that thefirst printing was just 500 copies (not an unusual first printingfor the time; the first printing for Origin of Species was just
1,250 copies), but it was never reprinted. The long article from1788 was a solid piece of scientific writing, but it was availableonly in a volume containing several other papers, and it was notbroadly distributed.
That Hutton’s book was virtually ignored by readers in
1795, and thereafter, seemed to seal his fate as a member of thelegion of forgotten scientists. In fact, one might argue that thekey to being remembered by posterity is to write a popularbook. The works of Charles Lyell and Charles Darwin areregarded as masterpieces, still wonderfully interesting andinsightful over 100 years after their publication. Adam Smith’sWealth of Nations carries a similar status. David Hume’s books,
though less widely read now , were best-sellers 200 years ago,and are actively perused by philosophy students today . New-ton’s Principia, though technical, is still read by most serious
students of physics. John Playfair’s own book, unlike Hutton’s,was well written and popular at the time, but perhaps it was pre-vented from remaining visible over the decades because he wasexplaining another’s work.
Steno, W erner, Black, and Hall also did not write books
that resonated across a broad spectrum of readers, and their2 0 6 THE MAN WHO FOUND TIME

fates have been similar to Hutton’s. But the lack of recognition
for the doctor is an enormous oversight: James Hutton’s bril-liant insights forever changed how we think about our planetand our place on it. The man who found time has hopefullybeen found at last.207 EPILOGUE

This page intentionally left blank 

Appendix
The purpose of this short appendix is threefold: to briefly
locate James Hutton’s ideas in the context of modern geology , to
explain the current interpretation of the key sites that he used toprove his theory , and to provide definitions of the geologicalphenomena he viewed. For a fuller description of all of thesesubjects, I recommend studying Stephen Marshak’s Earth: Por-
trait of a Planet (W . W . Norton, 2002), in my opinion the mostcomplete and up-to-date text in geology .
JAMES HUTTON’S 
PLACE IN MODERN GEOLOGY
James Hutton is recognized in geology circles as the “Father of
Modern Geology” because his theory of the earth was the start-ing point for the current understanding of the workings of thedynamic planet Earth. Many historians of the field believe thatHutton’s key finding was his recognition that geologic processesoccurring in the world today , such as the occasional earthquake
209

and the everyday rainstorm causing minute amounts of erosion,
are no different now than in the past. There was no period ofmore intense volcanic activity , and no earth-covering deluges,for example. This realization is today called the principle of uni-formitarianism, and geologists use the expression “The presentis the key to the past” as the embodiment of this idea. CharlesLyell took uniformitarianism to a new level, and it has been oneof the fundamental teachings of the profession ever since. (How-ever, recent research has shown that there have been episodes inthe earth’s history when the intensity of certain phenomena,such as volcanism, has been greater than at other times.)
Uniformitarianism is a valuable insight, but its hold has
been so strong that the discovery in the 1970s that the impact ofan asteroid (or comet) caused the mass extinction that killed offthe dinosaurs 65 million years ago was met with great resistancefor years. Only the perseverance of the team of scientists headedby W alter Alvarez led to the acceptance of the impact thesis andthe realization now that, yes, the present is the key to the past,but occasionally something catastrophic can occur. Thus, thecurrent view in geology is a synthesis of Hutton and Lyell’s uni-formitarianism and Cuvier-inspired catastrophism. Evidenceshows that there have been at least five mass extinctions sincethe evolution of complex life 500 million years ago, but it is notyet clear whether any of the others were caused by an impact;additional types of catastrophe may be awaiting discovery .
As important as the establishment of uniformitarianism was,
even more significant was James Hutton’s discovery that subter-ranean heat plays a role in the operation of the planet. Thoughother scientists had recognized that the inside of the earth was2 1 0 APPENDIX

hot, it was Hutton who saw this heat as crucial to the earth’s over-
all workings. This was a seminal contribution because all previousinvestigators of the earth had turned to water as the key causalagent. Hutton’s understanding of subterranean heat was the firststep to the modern theory of plate tectonics. Plate tectonics is theunifying theory of geology . It stipulates that the outer, rigid layer ofthe earth—called the lithosphere—consists of about twenty sepa-rate plates of crust that move with respect to one another as theyliterally float on top of the asthenosphere, which is the hot plasticlayer underneath the lithosphere. The fundamental differencebetween the lithosphere and asthenosphere is heat; the materialsthat make up the two layers are the same. All major geologic phe-nomena—volcanoes, earthquakes, and mountain formation beingthe most prominent—result from the interaction between theplates as they slide alongside one another, or collide, or separate.
James Hutton had no way of discerning the existence of lith-
osphere plates—which were recognized beginning in the late1960s—but his prediction that subterranean heat leads to thecreation of new land by raising previously submerged sedimen-tary rocks was essentially correct. The uplift he predicted doesoccur, and it is caused by the interaction of plates.
THE CURRENT UNDERST ANDING 
OF HUTTON’S EUREKA SPOTS
Siccar Point
Siccar Point reveals what is now called an unconformity , a sur-
face at which two separate sets of rocks that were clearly formedat different times come into contact. Siccar Point was formed in211 APPENDIX

the following way: The bottom formation, what Hutton called
the alpine schistus, is now called Silurian graywacke (graywackeis a sandstone made up of different-sized grains). It was formedapproximately 425 million years ago when colliding plates cre-ated an underwater trench in which sediments started to settle,carried in by submarine avalanches. Pressure compacted thesediment, and minerals precipitated out of water solutions tocement the grains together. Eventually , the sediment becamerock, the graywacke. Over time, the movement of the plates com-pressed and wrinkled the sediment layers, tilting some layersinto their present vertical orientation. Then this undersea for-mation was uplifted above sea level to form mountainous land.The uplifting was probably caused by the collision of two plates.Erosion then went to work on the new mountains.
By about 345 million years ago, the mountains of the raised
Silurian graywacke had been eroded to form a plain. Parts of thisplain were submerged beneath the sea. Erosion of the nearbyCaledonian Mountains, a range formed by a collision of theEuropean and North American plates, caused the deposition ofsediments in river channels, floodplains, and deltas over thegraywacke. These sediments eventually became the Old RedSandstone, or Red Devonian Sandstone.
More uplifting raised the entire structure above the water
again, only to be discovered by Hutton, Hall, and Playfair in 1788.
Glen Tilt
Glen Tilt is an area of igneous intrusion. Here magma rose andpushed up into preexisting rock by slowly creeping upward2 1 2 APPENDIX

between grains or in cracks. The magma did not make it all the
way to the surface, and thus cooled and solidified underground.
Arthur’s Seat
This fascinating mound at the eastern edge of Edinburgh is theresult of a complex series of events. As described in Chapter 7, thefirst known geologic event in the region was a period of intense vol-canism starting approximately 425 million years ago. Arthur’s Seatwas originally a volcanic cone, probably dating from the secondround of volcanism that hit the area 350 million years ago. Then theregion was flooded by a sea; sediments, which later became sedi-mentary rocks, built up and surrounded the cone. Later earth-quakes and mountain-formation pressure from colliding platesfurther raised and distorted the formation. Finally , an ice-age glacieroverran it all. Arthur’s Seat was particularly important for Hutton,though, because of the unusual wall of exposed rocks, called Salis-bury Crags, that traverses the side of the mound. He alone realizedthat the Crags were younger rocks than the strata around them. Hecorrectly deduced that the Salisbury Crags are what geologiststoday call a sill, which is an intrusion of igneous rock in between thelayers of preexisting rock. This realization became important as hepondered the significance of subterranean heat.
DEFINITIONS
Breccia. Coarse sedimentary rock consisting of rock fragments;
there is a layer of breccia between the Silurian graywacke and theOld Red Sandstone at Siccar Point.213 APPENDIX

Dike. A tabular (wall-shaped) intrusion of rock that cuts across
the layering of preexisting rock.
Erosion. The grinding away and removal of the earth’s surface
materials by moving water, air, and ice.Granite. A coarse-grained igneous rock. W erner argued that gran-
ite was the first rock precipitated from the receding universal ocean;
thus it was the oldest type of rock on earth; Hutton argued thatgranite came from the subterranean regions of the earth and that itwas often younger than sedimentary rocks (Hutton was right).
Ice Age. An interval of time in which the climate was colder than
it is today and glaciers advanced to cover large areas of the con-
tinents. Mountain glaciers also grew .
Igneous Rock. Rock that forms when hot molten rock (magma
or lava) cools and freezes solid.Intrusion. Rock formed by the freezing of magma underground.
The igneous veins found at Glen Tilt are intrusions.Limestone. Sedimentary rock composed of calcite; most lime-
stone consists of the shells of dead organisms like clams, corals,
and plankton.
Lithification. The process that causes loose sediments to convert
to sedimentary rocks. This transformation is caused by: (1) com-
paction from the weight of sediments above, and (2) cementation,2 1 4 APPENDIX

caused when minerals precipitate out of water solutions passing
through the sediment. Hutton was the first to understand the roleof pressure, but he did not know about cementation.
Marl. A sedimentary rock that is essentially a mix of limestone
and clay; it forms in coastal environments where rivers and
streams flow into lakes, seas, or oceans. It is very common on theeast side of England and Scotland.
Metamorphic Rock. Rock that forms when preexisting rock
(either igneous or sedimentary) changes to new rock as a result
of an increase in pressure and temperature. For example, marbleis the metamorphic rock that results from the extreme pressur-ing and heating of limestone, which is a sedimentary rock. Theexistence of metamorphism was not understood in James Hut-ton’s day , and many metamorphic rocks were confused with sed-imentary , because both can have layering. Hutton’s insistencethat both subterranean heat and pressure were needed to formstratified rocks was correct for metamorphic rocks, but incorrectfor sedimentary .
Plate T ectonics. The theory that the outer layer of the earth
consists of separate lithosphere plates that move with respect to
one another.
Precipitate. The solid crystals formed when atoms dissolved in a
solution come together. W erner’s system of the earth depended on
precipitation for the formulation of all rocks; W erner’s followersthought that rocks, such as granite, formed as the result of the215 APPENDIX

receding and evaporation of the universal ocean. This is not cor-
rect; granite forms by solidification of a melt.
Rock. A coherent, naturally occurring solid, consisting of an
aggregate of minerals or a mass of glass.Sandstone. A sedimentary rock consisting almost entirely of
sand grains; the sand is typically composed of quartz.Sedimentary Rock. Rock that forms either by the cementing
together of fragments broken off preexisting rock or by the pre-
cipitation of mineral crystals out of water solutions at or near theearth’s surface.
Sills. A nearly horizontal (like a windowsill), tabletop-shaped
tabular intrusion that injects between layers of preexisting rock.Subsidence. The vertical sinking of the earth’s surface in a
region relative to a reference plane. Subsidence creates space for
sediment layers to accumulate.
Unconformity . A boundary , between two different rock
sequences, that represents an interval of time during which sed-
iments were not deposited and/or were eroded.
Uplift. The vertical elevation of land. It is caused by a variety of
pressures, all related to the movement of crustal plates or mantle
flow . Uplift can yield mountain ranges.2 1 6 APPENDIX

Sources and
Suggested Readings
One work was a key to this entire project and was used in
almost every chapter: John Playfair’s Biographical Account of the
Late Dr. James Hutton, also referred to as the Life of Dr. Hutton.
This memorial was published in the fifth volume of the T ransac-
tions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1805 (still available from
the RSE Scotland Foundation), after having been read to the fel-
lows of the Society on January 10, 1803. The Life of Dr. Hutton
is only sixty pages long, but it is filled with invaluable informationabout James Hutton’s life, and, perhaps most important, detailsabout his thought processes based on conversations betweenHutton and Playfair that can be gleaned from no other source.
Informing the entire book as well are the four works on Hut-
ton’s theory of the earth. These are Hutton’s brief abstract from1785, which was never published (though it was typeset), andwhich carried the title “Abstract of a Dissertation Concerning
217

the System of the Earth, Its Duration, and Stability”; the article
from the T ransactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, offi-
cially titled “Theory of the Earth; or an Investigation of theLaws Observable in the Composition, Dissolution, and Restora-tion of Land upon the Globe,” which appeared in 1788 and wasthe document written by Hutton that created the biggest stiramong other scientists; Hutton’s two-volume Theory of theEarth, with Proofs and Illustrations (Edinburgh: William
Creech, 1795); and John Playfair’s Illustrations of the Hutton-
ian Theory of the Earth (Edinburgh: William Creach, 1802). In
1970, Hafner Publishing Company published a volume thatcompiled the abstract, the 1788 paper, and Playfair’s memorial.
Several secondary sources by the leading experts on James
Hutton were very useful, especially for the second half of thebook: Dennis R. Dean’s James Hutton and the History of Geol-ogy (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1992) and his “James
Hutton and His Public, 1785–1802,” Annals of Science, vol. 30
(1973); Jean Jones’s “James Hutton,” in The Scottish Enlighten-
ment, 1730–1790: A Hotbed of Genius, ed. David Daiches, Peter
Jones, and Jean Jones (Edinburgh: The Saltire Society , 1996)and her “James Hutton’s Agricultural Research and His Life asa Farmer,” Annals of Science, vol. 42 (1985); and Donald R.
McIntyre and Alan McKirdy’s James Hutton: The Founder of
Modern Geology (Edinburgh: The National Museums of Scot-
land Publishing, 2001). Each of these fine scholars has writtennumerous articles on specific topics, and these are cited below .
Finally , I found myself, time and again, consulting the mag-
isterial Dictionary of Scientific Biography, ed. Charles Coulston2 1 8 SOURCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS

Gillispie (New Y ork: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1970–1978), to
acquire essential information about the numerous, sometimesobscure, scientists referred to in the book.
What follows below is a list of the chief sources utilized
while researching each chapter. 
PROLOGUE
David Daiches, “The Scottish Enlightenment,” in David Daiches, Peter
Jones, and Jean Jones, eds., The Scottish Enlightenment,
1730–1790: A Hotbed of Genius (Edinburgh: The Saltire Society ,
1996).
Adrian Desmond and James Moore, Darwin: The Life of a T ormented
Evolutionist (London: Penguin Books, 1991).
Robert B. Downs, Books That Changed the World (London: Penguin
Books, 1956).
Jack Finegan, Handbook of Biblical Chronology (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1964).
Jean Jones, “James Hutton,” in David Daiches, Peter Jones, and Jean
Jones, eds., The Scottish Enlightenment, 1730–1790: A Hotbed of
Genius (Edinburgh: The Saltire Society , 1996).
John Playfair, “Life of Dr. Hutton,” in T ransactions of the Royal Society
of Edinburgh, vol. 5 (Edinburgh: Royal Society of Edinburgh,
1805).
CHAPTER ONEGordon Y . Craig, “Siccar Point: Hutton’s Classic Unconformity ,” in
Scottish Borders Geology, ed. A. D. McAdam, E. N. K. Clarkson, and
P . Stone (Edinburgh: Scottish Academic Press, 1993).
Gordon Y . Craig, Donald B. McIntyre, and Charles D. W aterston (with
Jean Jones and others), James Hutton’s Theory of the Earth: The
Lost Drawings (Edinburgh: Scottish Academic Press, 1978).
V . A. Eyles, “Sir James Hall,” in Dictionary of Scientific Biography, ed.
Charles Coulston Gillispie (New Y ork: Charles Scribner’s Sons,
1970–1978).219 SOURCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS

V . A. Eyles, “James Hutton,” in Dictionary of Scientific Biography, ed.
Charles Coulston Gillispie (New Y ork: Charles Scribner’s Sons,
1970–1978).
Jean Jones, “James Hutton,” in The Scottish Enlightenment, 1730–1790:
A Hotbed of Genius, ed. David Daiches, Peter Jones, and Jean Jones
(Edinburgh: The Saltire Society , 1996).
David Land, “What Else Did Hutton See at Siccar Point,” Edinburgh
Geology, vol. 21 (1989).
Stephen Marshak, Earth: Portrait of a Planet (New Y ork: W . W . Norton,
2002).
James G. Playfair, “Biographical Account of the Late Professor Playfair,” in
The Works of John Playfair (Edinburgh: A. Constable & Co., 1822).
John Playfair, “Life of Dr. Hutton,” in T ransactions of the Royal Society of
Edinburgh, vol. 5 (Edinburgh: Royal Society of Edinburgh, 1805).
CHAPTER TWO
F. J. Bacchus, “The Chronicle of Eusebius,” The Catholic Encyclopedia
(New Y ork: Robert Appleton Company , 1910).
F. J. Bacchus, “Eusebius of Caesarea,” The Catholic Encyclopedia (New
Y ork: Robert Appleton Company , 1910).
F. J. Bacchus, “Theophilus,” The Catholic Encyclopedia (New Y ork:
Robert Appleton Company , 1910).
Timothy David Barnes, Constantine and Eusebius (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1981).
James Barr, “Why the W orld W as Created in 4004 B.C.: Archbishop
Ussher and Biblical Chronology ,” The John Rylands University
Library Journal, vol. 67 (1985).
G. Brent Dalrymple, The Age of the Earth (Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press, 1991).
Jack Finegan, Handbook of Biblical Chronology (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1964).
Adrian Fortescue, “Julius Africanus,” The Catholic Encyclopedia (New
Y ork: Robert Appleton Company , 1910).
Charles Coulston Gillispie, Genesis and Geology (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1951).
Colin Groves, “From Ussher to Slusher, from Archbishop to Gish: Or,
N o t  i n  a  M i l l i o n  Y e a r s  ..., ”  Archeology in Oceania, vol. 31 (1996).2 2 0 SOURCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS

A. V ander Heeren, “The Septuagint V ersion,” The Catholic Encyclopedia
(New Y ork: Robert Appleton Company , 1910).
H. Leclercq, “The First Council of Nicea,” The Catholic Encyclopedia
(New Y ork: Robert Appleton Company , 1910).
Bruce M. Metzger and Michael D. Coogan, eds., The Oxford Companion
to the Bible (New Y ork and Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1993).
Stephen T oulmin and June Goodfield, The Discovery of Time (New
Y ork: Harper & Row , 1965).
CHAPTER THREE
W . J. Baird, The Scenery of Scotland, the Structure Beneath (Edinburgh:
National Museums of Scotland, n.d.).
W alter Biggar Blaikie, Edinburgh at the Time of the Occupation
(Edinburgh: T . and A. Constable, 1910).
Gale E. Christianson, In the Presence of the Creator: Isaac Newton and
His Times (New Y ork: The Free Press, 1984).
I. Bernard Cohen and Richard S. W estfall, Newton: A Norton Critical
Edition (New Y ork: W . W . Norton, 1995).
David Daiches, Edinburgh (London: Hamish Hamilton, 1978).
David Daiches, James Boswell & His World (New Y ork: Scribner, 1976).
T . M. Devine, The Scottish Nation, 1700–2000 (London: Penguin
Books, 1999).
Peter and Fiona Somerset Fry , The History of Scotland (London:
Routledge, 1982).
Nathaniel Harris, Heritage of Scotland (New Y ork: Checkmark Books,
2000).
Arthur Herman, How the Scots Invented the Modern World (New Y ork:
Crown Publishers, 2001).
Jean Jones, “James Hutton,” in The Scottish Enlightenment, 1730–1790:
A Hotbed of Genius, ed. David Daiches, Peter Jones, and Jean Jones
(Edinburgh: The Saltire Society , 1996).
David McAdam, Edinburgh: A Landscape Fashioned by Geology
(Edinburgh: The British Geological Survey , 1993).
John Playfair, “Life of Dr. Hutton,” in T ransactions of the Royal Society
of Edinburgh, vol. 5 (Edinburgh: Royal Society of Edinburgh,
1805).221 SOURCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS

J. F. Scott, “Colin Maclaurin,” in Dictionary of Scientific Biography,
Charles Coulston Gillispie, ed. (New Y ork: Charles Scribner’s
Sons, 1970–1978).
Robert Louis Stevenson, Edinburgh (London: Seeley , Service & Co., 1912).
Richard S. W estfall, The Life of Isaac Newton (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1993).
CHAPTER FOUR
W alter Biggar Blaikie, Edinburgh at the Time of the Occupation
(Edinburgh: T . and A. Constable, 1910).
Robert Chambers, History of the Rebellion in Scotland, in 1745, 1746
(Philadelphia: E. C. Mielke, 1833).
David Daiches, Charles Edward Stuart: The Life and Times of Bonnie
Prince Charlie (London: Thames and Hudson, 1973).
Arthur Herman, How the Scots Invented the Modern World (New Y ork:
Crown Publishers, 2001).
CHAPTER FIVEFrank Dawson Adams, The Birth and Development of the Geological
Sciences (London: Constable and Company , 1938).
Peter Bowler, The Earth Encompassed (New Y ork: W . W . Norton, 1993).
Albert Carozzi, “Benoit de Maillet,” in Dictionary of Scientific
Biography, ed. Charles Coulston Gillispie (New Y ork: Charles
Scribner’s Sons, 1970–1978).
A. C. Crombie, “René du Perron Descartes,” in Dictionary of Scientific
Biography, ed. Charles Coulston Gillispie (New Y ork: Charles
Scribner’s Sons, 1970–1978).
G. Brent Dalrymple, The Age of the Earth (Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press, 1991).
Archibald Geikie, The Founders of Geology (London: Macmillan, 1897).
Stephen Jay Gould, “Hutton’s Purpose,” in Hen’s T eeth and Horse’s T oes
(New Y ork: W . W . Norton, 1983).
Stephen Jay Gould, Time’s Arrow, Time’s Cycle (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1987).
Stephen Jay Gould, “The Titular Bishop of Titiopolis,” in Hen’s T eeth
and Horse’s T oes (New Y ork: W . W . Norton, 1983).2 2 2 SOURCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS

Suzanne Kelly , “Thomas Burnet,” in Dictionary of Scientific Biography,
ed. Charles Coulston Gillispie (New Y ork: Charles Scribner’s Sons,
1970–1978).
Charles Lyell, Principles of Geology, vol. 1 (London: J. Murray , 1830;
reprint, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990).
John Playfair, “Life of Dr. Hutton,” in T ransactions of the Royal
Society of Edinburgh, vol. 5 (Edinburgh: Royal Society of
Edinburgh, 1805).
R. Rappaport, “Guillaume-François Rouelle,” in Dictionary of Scientific
Biography, ed. Charles Coulston Gillispie (New Y ork: Charles
Scribner’s Sons, 1970–1978).
Jacque Roger, “George-Louis Buffon,” in Dictionary of Scientific
Biography, ed. Charles Coulston Gillispie (New Y ork: Charles
Scribner’s Sons, 1970–1978).
Keith S. Thomson, “V estiges of James Hutton,” American Scientist, vol.
89 (May–June 2001).
Stephen T oulmin and June Goodfield, The Discovery of Time (New
Y ork: Harper & Row , 1965).
Richard S. W estfall, “Robert Hooke,” in Dictionary of Scientific
Biography, ed. Charles Coulston Gillispie (New Y ork: Charles
Scribner’s Sons, 1970–1978).
CHAPTER SIX
Lawrence Airey , “A Brief History of Berwick” (distributed by the
Berwick Upon T weed Civic Society , 1989).
Jean Jones, “James Hutton’s Agricultural Research and His Life as a
Farmer,” Annals of Science, vol. 42 (1985).
E. C. Mossner, The Life of David Hume, 2d ed. (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1980).
John Playfair, “Life of Dr. Hutton,” in T ransactions of the Royal Society of
Edinburgh, vol. 5 (Edinburgh: Royal Society of Edinburgh, 1805).
CHAPTER SEVENR. G. W . Anderson, “Joseph Black,” in The Scottish Enlightenment,
1730–1790: A Hotbed of Genius, ed. David Daiches, Peter Jones,
and Jean Jones (Edinburgh: The Saltire Society , 1996) .223 SOURCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS

Alexander Broadie, ed., The Scottish Enlightenment: An Anthology
(Edinburgh: Canongate Books, 1997).
Norman E. Butcher, “James Hutton’s House at the St. John’s Hill,
Edinburgh,” in Book of the Old Edinburgh Club (Edinburgh: T . and
A. Constable, 1997).
N. Campbell, R. Martin, and S. Smellie, The Royal Society of Edinburgh
(Edinburgh: The Society , 1983).
Archibald Clow and Nan L. Clow , “Dr. James Hutton and the
Manufacture of Sal Ammoniac,” Nature, vol. 159 (1947).
David Daiches, “The Scottish Enlightenment,” in The Scottish
Enlightenment, 1730–1790: A Hotbed of Genius, ed. David Daiches,
Peter Jones, and Jean Jones (Edinburgh: The Saltire Society , 1996).
Harold Dorn, “James W att,” in Dictionary of Scientific Biography, ed.
Charles Coulston Gillispie (New Y ork: Charles Scribner’s Sons,
1970–1978).
V . A. Eyles and Joan M. Eyles, “Some Geological Correspondence of
James Hutton,” in Annals of Science, vol. 7 (1951).
Adam Ferguson, “Life of Dr. Black,” in T ransactions of the Royal Society of
Edinburgh, vol. 5 (Edinburgh: Royal Society of Edinburgh, 1805).
Henry Guerlac, “Joseph Black,” in Dictionary of Scientific Biography,
ed. Charles Coulston Gillispie (New Y ork: Charles Scribner’s Sons,1970–1978).
Arthur Herman, How the Scots Invented the Modern World (New Y ork:
Crown Publishers, 2001).
Jean Jones, “The Geological Collection of James Hutton,” Annals of
Science, vol. 41 (1984).
Jean Jones, “James Hutton and the Forth and Clyde Canal,” Annals of
Science, vol. 39 (1982).
Jean Jones, Hugh S. T orrens, and Eric Robinson, “The Correspondence
Between James Hutton and James W att, Part 1,” Annals of Science,
vol. 51 (1994). 
Jean Jones, Hugh S. T orrens, and Eric Robinson, “The Correspondence
Between James Hutton and James W att, Part 2,” Annals of Science,
vol. 52 (1995).
Peter Jones, “David Hume,” in The Scottish Enlightenment, 1730–1790:
A Hotbed of Genius, ed. David Daiches, Peter Jones, and Jean Jones
(Edinburgh: The Saltire Society , 1996).2 2 4 SOURCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS

E. C. Mossner, The Life of David Hume (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1980).
John Playfair, “Life of Dr. Hutton,” in T ransactions of the Royal Society
at Edinburgh, vol. 5.
John Rae, Life of Adam Smith (London: Macmillan & Co., 1895).
D. D. Raphael, “Adam Smith,” in The Scottish Enlightenment,
1730–1790: A Hotbed of Genius, ed. David Daiches, Peter Jones,
and Jean Jones (Edinburgh: The Saltire Society , 1996).
Eric Robinson and Douglas McKie, Partners in Science (London:
Constable, 1970).
CHAPTER EIGHT
Gordon Y . Craig, Donald B. McIntyre, and Charles D. W aterston (with
Jean Jones and others), James Hutton’s Theory of the Earth: The
Lost Drawings (Edinburgh: Scottish Academic Press, 1978).
Dennis R. Dean, “James Hutton and His Public, 1785–1802,” Annals of
Science, vol. 30 (1973).
Dennis R. Dean, James Hutton and the History of Geology (Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 1992).
Dennis R. Dean, “James Hutton on Religion and Geology: The
Unpublished Preface to His Theory of the Earth,” Annals of
Science, vol. 32 (1975).
Dennis R. Dean, ed., James Hutton in the Field and in the Study
(Delmar, NY: Scholar’s Facsimiles & Reprints, 1997).
M. D. Eddy , “Geology , Mineralogy and Time in John W alker’s
University of Edinburgh Natural History Lectures, 1779–1803,”
History of Science, vol. 39 (2001).
James Hutton, “Abstract of a Dissertation Concerning the System of the
Earth, Its Duration, and Stability ,” in James Hutton’s System of the
Earth (Darien, CT: Hafner Publishing Co., 1970).
James Hutton, “Observations on Granite,” in James Hutton’s System of
the Earth (Darien, CT: Hafner Publishing Co., 1970).
James Hutton, “Theory of the Earth; Or an Investigation of the Laws
Observable in the Composition, Dissolution, and Restoration ofLand upon the Globe,” in James Hutton’s System of the Earth
(Darien, CT: Hafner Publishing Co., 1970).225 SOURCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS

James Hutton, Theory of the Earth, with Proofs and Illustrations
(Edinburgh: William Creech, 1795).
Donald B. McIntyre and Alan McKirdy , James Hutton: The Founder of
Modern Geology (Edinburgh: National Museums of Scotland
Publishing Limited, 2001).
John Playfair, Illustrations of the Huttonian Theory of the Earth
(Edinburgh: William Creech, 1802).
John Playfair, “Life of Dr. Hutton,” in T ransactions of the Royal Society of
Edinburgh, vol. 5 (Edinburgh: Royal Society of Edinburgh, 1805).
E. L. Scott, “Richard Kirwan,” in Dictionary of Scientific Biography, ed.
Charles Coulston Gillispie (New Y ork: Charles Scribner’s Sons,1970–1978).
Harold W . Scott, “John W alker,” in Dictionary of Scientific Biography,
ed. Charles Coulston Gillispie (New Y ork: Charles Scribner’s Sons,1970–1978).
CHAPTER NINE
Robert P . Beckinsale, “Jean Andre De Luc,” in Dictionary of Scientific
Biography, ed. Charles Coulston Gillispie (New Y ork: Charles
Scribner’s Sons, 1970–1978).
Franck Bourdier, “Georges Cuvier,” in Dictionary of Scientific
Biography, ed. Charles Coulston Gillispie (New Y ork: Charles
Scribner’s Sons, 1970–1978).
Gordon Y . Craig, Donald B. McIntyre, and Charles D. W aterston (with
Jean Jones and others), James Hutton’s Theory of the Earth: The
Lost Drawings (Edinburgh: Scottish Academic Press, 1978).
Georges Cuvier, Essay on the Theory of the Earth, 2d ed. (Edinburgh:
William Blackwood, 1815).
Joan M. Eyles, “Robert Jameson,” in Dictionary of Scientific Biography,
ed. Charles Coulston Gillispie (New Y ork: Charles Scribner’s Sons,
1970–1978).
V . A. Eyles, “Sir James Hall,” in Dictionary of Scientific Biography, ed.
Charles Coulston Gillispie (New Y ork: Charles Scribner’s Sons,1970–1978).
Derek Flinn, “James Hutton and Robert Jameson,” Scottish Journal of
Geology, vol. 16 (1980).2 2 6 SOURCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS

James G. Playfair, “Biographical Account of the Late Professor Playfair,”
in The Works of John Playfair (Edinburgh: A. Constable & Co.,
1822).
Martin J. S. Rudwick, “Adolphe-Theodore Brongniart,” in Dictionary of
Scientific Biography, ed. Charles Coulston Gillispie (New Y ork:
Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1970–1978).
Martin J. S. Rudwick, “Louis-Constant Prevost,” in Dictionary of
Scientific Biography, ed. Charles Coulston Gillispie (New Y ork:
Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1970–1978).
CHAPTER TEN
Philip Appleman, Darwin, Norton Critical Edition, 3d ed. (New Y ork:
W . W . Norton, 2001).
John Bowlby , Charles Darwin: A New Life (New Y ork: W . W . Norton,
1991).
W alter F. Cannon, “William Buckland,” in Dictionary of Scientific
Biography, ed. Charles Coulston Gillispie (New Y ork: Charles
Scribner’s Sons, 1970–1978).
Charles Darwin, The Autobiography of Charles Darwin, 1809–1882, ed.
Nora Barlow (London: Collins, 1958).
Charles Darwin, The Origin of Species (London: John Murray , 1859).
Adrian Desmond and James Moore, Darwin: The Life of a T ormented
Evolutionist (London: Penguin Books, 1991).
Charles Lyell, Life, Letters, and Journals of Sir Charles Lyell (London:
John Murray , 1881).
Charles Lyell, Principles of Geology, vol. 1 (London: J. Murray , 1830;
reprint, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990).
Mark Ridley , The Darwin Reader, 2d ed. (New Y ork: W . W . Norton, 1996).
Leonard G. Wilson, Charles Lyell, the Y ears to 1841: The Revolution in
Geology (New Haven, CT: Y ale University Press, 1972).
Leonard G. Wilson, “Lyell: The Man and His Times,” in Lyell: The Past
Is the Key to the Present, ed. D. J. Blundell and A. C. Scott (London:
Geological Society , 1998).
Leonard G. Wilson, “The Origins of Charles Lyell’s
Uniformitarianism,” in Uniformity and Simplicity, ed. Claude C.
Albritton (The Geological Society of America, 1967).227 SOURCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS

EPILOGUE
Jed Z. Buchwald, “William Thomson/Lord Kelvin,” in Dictionary of
Scientific Biography, ed. Charles Coulston Gillispie (New Y ork:
Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1970–1978).
G. Brent Dalrymple, The Age of the Earth (Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press, 1991).
Cherry Lewis, The Dating Game: One Man’s Search for the Age of the
Earth (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000).
Alfred Romer, “Antoine-Henri Becquerel,” in Dictionary of Scientific
Biography, ed. Charles Coulston Gillispie (New Y ork: Charles
Scribner’s Sons, 1970–1978).
Chris Stassen, “Chronology of Radiometric Dating,” unpublished
article, 1998.
OTHER RECOMMENDED READINGSFrank Dawson Adams, The Birth and Development of the Geological
Sciences (London: Constable and Company , 1938).
Claude Allegre, From Stone to Star: A View of Modern Geology
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1992).
W alter Alvarez, T. Rex and the Crater of Doom (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1997).
Stephen J. Gould, Time’s Arrow, Time’s Cycle: Myth and Metaphor in the
Discovery of Geological Time (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1987).
Rachel Laudan, From Mineralogy to Geology: The Foundations of a
Science, 1650–1830 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987).
John A. McPhee, Annals of the Former World (New Y ork: Farrar, Straus
& Giroux, 1998).
E. K. Peters, No Stone Unturned: Reasoning About Rocks and Fossils
(New Y ork: W . H. Freeman and Company , 1996).
Martin J. S. Rudwick, Scenes from Deep Time (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1992).
Jenny Uglow , The Lunar Men (New Y ork: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 2002).
Simon Winchester, The Map That Changed the World: William Smith
and the Birth of Modern Geology (New Y ork: HarperCollins, 2001).2 2 8 SOURCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS

Acknowledgments
Ihave been a book editor for twenty years, but until working
on my own enterprise, I never truly appreciated how collaborative
the book-writing process is. Quite simply , I could not have writtenthis study without a tremendous amount of assistance from anumber of key people who were experts on James Hutton, Scot-land, geology , history , books, or some combination of the above. Asmall group went beyond the call of duty and were of fundamen-tal importance to the project. I would like to thank them here.
Gary Hincks, the most accomplished geology artist I have
ever worked with, was tremendously supportive. Sendingbooks, making sketches, helping me visualize scenes, providingintroductions, and otherwise lending me his broad understand-ing about geology and the United Kingdom, his early active aidwas essential for getting the book off the ground.
Jean Jones, an outstanding historian of science and among
the small group of scholars who have made substantial contri-butions to the extant literature on James Hutton, has been enor-mously generous with her time and expertise. In addition to
229

directing me to all her own relevant articles as well as those of
others, each of which was extensively used, she read large partsof the manuscript and saved me from many embarrassing mis-takes, misstatements, and misleading comments. Of course, anyremaining errors are entirely my own.
Stephen Marshak, of the University of Illinois, is a gifted
geologist and the author of one of the leading introductory text-books in the field. He has consistently been available to “talkgeology” with me. Steve took an active interest in the Huttonbook, and with his guidance, I have tried mightily to present thegeology correctly .
Peter Nevraumont, of Nevraumont Publishing Company ,
served as a much-needed sounding board for me in the earlystages of the project, and his broad reading and incredible goodsense helped me devise how I was going to tell the story of JamesHutton.
Dr. Michael A. T aylor, Curator of V ertebrate Paleontology at
the National Museums of Scotland, offered tremendous assis-tance during my visit to Edinburgh, providing me with manyuseful publications and sources. His staff members went out oftheir way to be supportive and courteous.
Leonard G. Wilson, of the University of Minnesota, is
among the leading scholars on Charles Lyell and early nine-teenth-century geology . He was very generous with his knowl-edge, and was a tremendous resource for the final chapters.
T wo families enriched my visit to Scotland: the Marshalls,
who own James Hutton’s old farm, Slighhouses; and the Drys-dales, who own the land that includes Siccar Point. Both wereextraordinarily pleasant and cooperative.2 3 0 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

In addition to these individuals, various other people have
given their time and talent, and I would like to take this oppor-
tunity to recognize them. First, the book would have beenimpossible to write without the important research and spade-work done by the small group of historians of science who havepieced together the details of the underdocumented life of JamesHutton. Their research is impressive, and they are all excellentwriters as well: Dennis R. Dean, the already mentioned JeanJones, and Donald B. McIntyre. Similarly , Leonard G. Wilson’srich and insightful research into Charles Lyell was invaluable.
I first learned about James Hutton while working on the
geology books that I published at Princeton University Press andW . W . Norton & Company in the 1990s, and I would like tothank all my geology authors and friends who stimulated me toappreciate their fascinating, challenging, and dynamic field: RickAlley , W alter Alvarez, Bob Ballard, T ony Dahlen, Dick Fisher,Grant Heiken, Paul Hoffman, Dick Holland, Andy Knoll, DavidLamb, the already mentioned Steve Marshak, George Philander,Wylie Poag, Chris Scholz, Bill Schopf, Dan Schrag, Art Snoke,Jeroen T romp, Ben van der Pluijm, and Cindy van Dover.
The Man Who Found Time is a work of popular history , too,
and I was fortunate to have some wonderful teachers who turnedme on to history many years ago. They have no idea how muchthey have enriched my life: the late, great Kent Forster; RobertGreen, Charles Hunnel, Steve Kale, Michael MacDonald, BillT omey , and especially Jim Donnelly and Jack Spielvogel.
Many friends and colleagues either read the proposal or
chapters or discussed ideas at length with me, and they were ofgreat service as I sorted through the many issues related to the231 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

story . In particular, I would like to express my appreciation to
Mandy Brown, Peter Dougherty , George Funkhouser, SusanGaustad, Charles Gillispie, Roby Harrington, Richard Hughes,Marian Johnson, Don Lamm, Drake McFeely , Kurt Radke, PamScholer, Janet Stites, Wynn Sullivan, and Angela von der Lippe.Leelo Marjamaa was instrumental during the final execution ofthe proposal.
I have been blessed during my career in working with scores
of outstanding scholars and writers. All my authors have taughtme something new about a subject or about writing in general,and I thank them all. A few have been the lynchpins of my careerand I would like to recognize them here: Padma Desai, BillGreene, Bennett McCallum, and especially Dave Kreps.
My agent, Susan Rabiner, an author herself and talented for-
mer editor, was simply outstanding during the tough conceptualstages of the endeavor. I am still amazed by how much work sheinvested in my effort and how much good sense she applied toit. She is known in the publishing industry as among the best atwhat she does, and now I know why .
I thank all the folks at Perseus Publishing who have been so
patient, committed, and supportive, in particular David Goehring,Carolyn Savarese, and Elizabeth Carduff, three of the top pros inthe book business. Thanks also to Erica Lawrence and JenniferBlakebrough-Raeburn for their careful attention through the copy-editing stage.
As important as everyone mentioned above has been, if this
book has any popular appeal, it is because of my editor, AmandaCook. Every interaction I had with her, and there were many ,2 3 2 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

taught me something new about the editorial craft. Whoever
started the rumor in the publishing industry that editors do notedit anymore has not encountered Amanda—she worked tire-lessly on my manuscript. She was motivating and smart, filledwith good ideas, and, most important, she knew where to focusand where to let go. I feel the book is as much hers as mine.
Thanks also to my great kids, Julie, Christie, Karl, Kerry ,
Laura, and now Clay , too, who gave up weekends with Dad for acouple of years; and to my wonderful wife, Donna, for comingup with the book’s title, for reading every word of the manu-script, and for giving me a number of good suggestions.
Finally , I would like to thank my parents, Claire and Jack
Repcheck, to whom this book is dedicated, for all their backingover the years, and for raising me and my brothers and sisters ina household that celebrated curiosity .
When I started on this book, I had hoped it would be an
intellectual adventure, but my overriding memory will always beof a real adventure. Seeing Siccar Point with my parents andDonna on a rainy June day in 2002 from the fields just below itwas remarkable enough—it is such a spectacular sight—but thenbeing chased out of that wet pasture by twenty angry cows reallyseared the memory . I now know why James Hutton chose toexplore the area by boat.233 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This page intentionally left blank 

Index
Aberdeen University , 59
Act of Union with England, 56–57,
65
Adam, Robert, 128Alaric, 38Alexander the Great, 30Alvarez, W alter, 210American W ar of Independence, 
205
Analytical Review, 161
Angles, 48Annales Veteris T estamenti (Annals of
the Old T estament) (Ussher),
42
Apocalyptic prophesy , 39. See also
Biblical chronology
Arduino, Giovanni, 148–149Arran, 158, 164, 167–168Arthur’s Seat, 64, 125–126, 213Atheism, 5Athol, Duke of, 156Attila the Hun, 38–39Augustine, St., 5–6Auld Reekie, 52Auvergne, 186Bakewell, Robert, 180
Introduction to Geology, 180
Bank of Scotland, 56Basalt, 171. See also Subterranean
heat, existence of
Becquerel, Henri, 202Bede the V enerable, 5–6
biblical chronology of, 40, 42
Bell, John, 109Berwick, 105–106Bible
and Luther, Martin, 41translation of, and Jerome, St.,
29–30
See also individual bibles
Biblical chronology , 1–6, 5–6, 14,
94–95, 153
of Bede the V enerable, 40, 42of Eusebius, 28–31, 41of Fiore, Joachim, 40of Isidore of Seville, 40, 42of Jerome, St., 37–38and Jesus Christ, second coming
of, 35–37, 39–40, 41
of Josephus, Flavius, 31–32
235

of Julius Africanus, 32–37, 32(n3),
41, 42, 43
of Kepler, Johannes, 43
of Luther, Martin, 40–41, 42, 43of Newton, Sir Isaac, 42–43,
97–98
and recalculation, 37–38of Theophilus of Antioch, 32(n3)of Ussher, James, 42–43See also Earth, age of; Earth,
theory of
Biblical geology , 4, 97
and Lyell’s Principles of Geology,
199
Black, Joseph, 9, 119, 129, 130–134,
135, 136, 138, 140–141, 142,143, 153, 160, 163–164, 167,172–173, 190, 206–207
”Experiments on Magnesia Alba,
Quicklime, and other AlcalineSubstances,” 132
and Hutton’s theory of earth,
presentation of, 150–151
Blair, 156Boar Club, 140Boerhaave, Hermann, 87, 90Boltwood, Bertram
and earth, age of, calculation of,
203
Bonnie Prince Charlie. See Stuart,
Charles Edward
Book of Daniel, 43Book of Genesis, 1, 3, 4–5, 6, 31, 94.
See also Biblical chronology
Book of Moses, 31Book of Revelation, 6, 43Borders, 104–107Brahe, T ycho, 61Brongniart, Alexandre, 174Buckland, William, 180–182, 183,
184, 191
and earth, theory of, 181, 185and Lyell’s Principles of Geology,
199
Buffon, G. L. de, 99–100, 101,
101(n1), 153
and earth, theory of, 148Histoire Naturelle, 99–100, 148
Bulgars, 39Bunkle Castle, 107, 115Burgundians, 38Burnet, Thomas, 97–98
The Sacred Theory of the Earth,
97–98
Burnett, Elspeth, 88Burns, Robert, 128Burt, Edward, 52–54Byzantine Empire, 39
Calculus, invention of, 61
Caltech, 204Cambridge University , 6, 191Cameron clan
and Jacobite Uprising of 1745,
71–82
Cape Club, 139–140Carbon dioxide, discovery of,
131–132, 142, 172
Carlisle, 79Castle Rock, 46–47, 48, 50Catastrophism, 175, 183–184, 191,
192, 210
and Lyell’s Principles of Geology,
199
Catholic Church, 14Chile, 185Chirnside, 106Christian Bible, 30236 I N D E X

Christian church
and earth, age of, 13–14
Christianity
and Constantine I, 26–27, 37–38
Chronologia (Julius), 33–37
Chronology (Eusebius), 29–30, 30–31,
33, 37–38
Clerk, John, 128, 155, 164, 167
An Essay on Naval T actics, 128
Clerk-Maxwell, George, 109,
112–113, 123, 136, 155,
156–157
Color, properties of, 61Commission for the Forfeited
Annexed Estates, 112
“Concerning the System of the Earth,
Its Duration, and Stability”(James Hutton), 151
Constantine I, 26–27, 26(n1)
and Christianity , 37–38and Eusebius, 28
Constantinople, 26(n1)Cope, Jonathan, 73–74, 76, 77, 78Copernicus, Nicolaus, 2–3, 5, 7, 61
De Revolutionibus Oribium
Coelestium, 3
Corriearrick, 74Cosmogonies, 97–101Council of Nicaea, 26–28, 40Crag and tail, 47Crichton-Browne, Sir James, 124Critical Review, 160
Crochallan Fencilbles, 140Crop rotation, 111Cullen, William, 119, 128, 132, 143,
145, 147, 153
Culloden Moor, battle of, 80–81, 86Cumberland, Duke of, 81–82, 118Curie, Marie, 202Curie, Pierre, 202Custom House, 138Cuvier, Georges, 178, 183–184
and earth, theory of, 174–175,
176, 181, 185
Cycles, notion of, 90–91
D’Alembert, Jean, 121
Damascus, Pope, 29Darien Affair, 55–56Dark Ages, 38Darwin, Charles, 5, 6–7, 11, 103, 129,
153, 188–198, 205, 206
and earth, age of, calculation of,
200
and evolution, theory of, insight
for, 191–193. See alsoEvolution, theory of
and Jameson, Robert, 189–191,
192
and Lyell, Charles, 191–193, 196,
197–198
Origin of Species, 196, 197–198,
200, 206
and Sedgwick, Adam, 191
Darwin, Erasmus, 129, 189David, King, 48Davie, James, 91–92, 93Davie/Hutton Sal Ammoniac chemical
works, 92, 123–124, 125
De’ crostacei (Moro), 97
Deism, 5, 62–63De Luc, Jean André, 167, 170, 171
and earth, theory of, 165, 174
Deluge, 18
and Lyell’s Principles of Geology,
199
See also Noah’s Flood; Universal
Ocean theory237 INDEX

De Revolutionibus Oribium
Coelestium (Copernicus), 3
De sanguine et circulatione in
microcosmo (The Blood and the
Circulation of the Microcosm)(James Hutton), 90–91
Descartes, René, 61, 95Dialogue Concerning the T wo Chief
World Systems (Galileo), 3
Diderdot, Denis, 121Dinner parties, and intellectual
exchange, 139
Discourse of Earthquakes (Hooke), 96
Dissertation Concerning a Sold Body
Enclosed By the Process ofNature Within a Solid (Steno),
95–96
Drainage ditches, 110Drummond, George, 74–75, 85–86,
86–87, 117–118, 119–120
Duke of Solm’s ironworks, 147Dunglass Burn beach, 19, 23Duns, 106–107Duns Castle, 107Dybold, John, 93
Earth, age of, 1–11
calculation of, 199–204
and Christian church, 13–14and Lyell, Charles, 6–7See also Biblical chronology;
Earth, theory of
Earth, as center of universe, 2–3Earth: Portrait of a Planet (Marshak),
209
Earth, theory of
and Buckland, William, 181, 
185
and Buffon, G. L. de, 148and Cuvier, Georges, 174–175,
176, 181, 185
and De Luc, Jean André, 165, 174and Hutton, James, 4–5, 6–8,
10–11, 14–15, 17–18,114–116, 209–211
and key books, c. 1752, 95–101and W erner, Abraham Gottlob,
147–150, 153, 181, 185. See
also Universal ocean theory
See also Biblical chronology;
Earth, age of
Earth processes, 95–96, 101Earthquakes, 96Edict of Milan, 27Edinburgh, 9
building structures in, 51–52geologic history of, 45–47and Jacobites, purging of, 117–118landmarks in, 46–50and New T own, 119–120plumbing system in, 52–54social structure in, 52tenements in, 52weather in, 50–51
Edinburgh High School, 58–59Edinburgh (R. Stevenson), 50–51
Edwin, King (of Northumbria), 48Elements of Geognosy (Jameson), 173
Elijah, 5–6, 36, 41The Encyclopedia Britannica (ed.
Smellie), 128, 167, 176–177
England
march on, and Jacobite Uprising of
1745, 78–92, 85
and Scotland, union with, 56–57,
65
England, southwest, 135–136English Anglican Church, 14238 I N D E X

Erosion, dynamics of, 8, 19, 64, 65,
110, 113–114, 115–116, 134,
210. See also Huttonian theory
Erratics, 176An Essay on Naval T actics (Clerk), 128
Essay on the History of Civil Society
(Ferguson), 128
Essay on the Natural History of the
Earth (James Hutton),113–114
Essay on the Principle of Population
(Mathus), 195–196
Essay T oward a Natural History of the
Earth (W oodward), 98
Euclidian geometry , 16Eusebius, 27–28, 39
biblical chronology of, 28–31, 41Chronology, 29–30, 30–31, 33,
37–38
and Julius’s Chronologia, 37
Evolution, theory of, 5, 7, 11
insight for, 191–193See also Darwin, Charles
Experimental geology , 172“Experiments on Magnesia Alba,
Quicklime, and other AlcalineSubstances” (Black), 132
Eyemouth, 106
Father of Modern Geology , 209
Ferguson, Adam, 128, 132, 143, 154
Essay on the History of Civil
Society, 128
Fiore, Joachim
biblical chronology of, 40
Firth of Clyde, 122Firth of Forth, 122Fixed air, 131Flodden Field, battle of, 49Flodden W all, 49–50, 51Forth and Clyde Canal, construction
of, 122–123
Forth and Clyde Canal committee, 123Forth and Clyde Navigation Company ,
122–123
The 45. See Jacobite Uprising of 1745
France
and Stuart, Charles Edward,
69–70, 78–79
Franklin, Benjamin, 121, 129Franks, 38, 39Freiburg School of Mines, 147–148French Enlightenment, 90French Revolution, 89, 174, 205
Galapagos Islands, 193–194
Galileo, 3, 5, 7, 61, 95, 205
Dialogue Concerning the T wo Chief
World Systems, 3
Galloway , 157–158Geological Society , 174, 180, 182,
191
Geology , 6–8George II, 72, 81Gerling, E., 203Glaciers, 176Glasgow , 80, 122, 123Glasgow University , 59Glenfinnan, 71Glen Tilt, 156–157, 164, 184,
212–213
Gododdins, 48Gould, John, 194Gould, Stephen Jay , 7–8, 114Grampian Mountains, 156Granite, 155–158. See also
Subterranean heat, existence of
Great Glen Fault, 113239 INDEX

Greyfriar’s Cemetery , 163
Gutenberg, Johannes, 30Gutted Haddie, 64
Hall, James, 11, 94, 129, 160, 164,
167–168, 175–176, 178–179,
185, 206–207
and Huttonian theory , defense of,
170–173
and North Sea coast, 16–23”On the Revolutions of the Earth’s
Surface,” 176
Hall, John, 93, 94Halley , Edmund, 97Hardy , Thomas, 104Harrying of the glens, 81–82Heat and pressure, insights into, 132,
133–134, 134(n1). See alsoSubterranean heat, existence of
Hebrew Bible, 30–31Highlander clans
and Jacobite Uprising of 1745,
67–82
Highlands, 112–113Highland Scotland, 68Histoire Naturelle (Buffon), 99–100,
148
The History of England (Hume), 121
History of Scotland (Robertson), 128
HMS Beagle, 6
Holmes, Arthur
and earth, age of, calculation of,
203, 204
Holyrood Abbey , 48–49Hooke, Robert, 96
Discourse of Earthquakes, 96
Hooker, Joseph, 197Hope, Thomas, 190Houtermans, F., 203Hume, David, 9, 63, 88, 120–122,
129, 130, 132, 136, 139, 206
The History of England, 121
A T reatise of Human Nature,
120–121
Hume, Joseph, 88–89Hutton, Isabella, 163Hutton, James
in Arran, 158at Arthur’s Seat, 64, 125–126birth of, 43, 45”Concerning the System of the
Earth, Its Duration, andStability ,” 151
daily habits, 126–127death of, 160–161, 163De sanguine et circulatione in
microcosmo (The Blood and theCirculation of the Microcosm),90–91
early life, 54–64and earth, age of, calculation of,
199–200
and earth, theory of, 4–5, 6–8,
10–11, 14–15, 17–18,114–116, 209–211. See alsoHuttonian theory
and earth, theory of, book on, 161and earth, theory of, critics of,
154–155, 164–167, 173
and earth, theory of, paper on, 159and earth, theory of, paper on,
review of, 159–161
and earth, theory of, presentation
of, 145–146, 150–154
at Edinburgh High School, 58–59Essay on the Natural History of
the Earth, 113–114
estate of, 163–164240 I N D E X

and family farm. See Slighhouses
family holdings, 108. See also
Slighhouses
and farming, 93–94, 103–116
in Galloway , 157–158in Glen Tilt, 156–157and Highlands, tour of, 112–113and illegitimate son, 88–89, 91,
124, 164
and law apprenticeship, 64in London, 91and medical school, 64, 65at Norfolk, 93–94and North Sea coast, 13–24personality of, 9–10recognition for, lack of, 204–207siblings of, 124at Siccar Point, 21–22, 158, 170in southwest England and W ales,
135–136
and St. John’s Hill, house at,
124–125
The Theory of the Earth, 161, 164,
168, 206
at University of Edinburgh, 59–63at University of Leyden, 90–91at University of Paris, 88–90
Hutton, John, 107Hutton, Sarah Balfour, 43, 54–55, 58Hutton, William, 43, 54, 55, 56, 69,
107, 108
death of, 57–58
Huttonian theory , 190
and Hall, James, defense of,
170–173
and Lyell, Charles, defense of,
182–189, 190, 192
and Lyell’s Principles of Geology,
199and Playfair, John, defense of,
167–170, 173
vs. W ernerian theory , 17–18,
166–167, 173, 183. See alsoW ernerian theory
See also Hutton, James, and earth,
theory of
Ice Age, 8, 176Illustrations of the Huttonian Theory
of the Earth (Playfair),
168–170, 173, 185, 206
Impact thesis, 210Imperial College, 203Industrial Revolution, 9Inquisition, 3Introduction to Geology (Bakewell), 180
Isidore of Seville
biblical chronology of, 40, 42
Isle of Isk, 187Isle of Wight, 184Isotope geologists, 203“Is the Huttonian Theory of the Earth
Consistent with Fact?”(Jameson), 165–166
Isthmus of Darien, 55Italy , 39, 186–187Iznit, T urkey , 26(n1)
Jacobites, 57
purging of, in Edinburgh, 117–118
Jacobite Uprising of 1689, 68–69
Jacobite Uprising of 1715, 69Jacobite Uprising of 1745, 67–82, 117
and battle method, 76–77and Culloden Moor, battle of,
80–81, 86
and England, march on, 78–92, 85and Preston, battle of, 76–78241 INDEX

James, Robert, 175
James II, 55, 57, 65, 68–69James III, 68, 69Jameson, Robert, 165–167, 168, 170,
171, 173, 176, 178
and Darwin, Charles, 189–191, 192Elements of Geognosy, 173
”Is the Huttonian Theory of the
Earth Consistent with Fact?”,165–166
and Lyell’s Principles of Geology,
199
Mineralogy of Scotland, 166
An Outline of the Mineralogy of the
Shetland Islands, and of theIsland of Arran, 166
Jardin du Roi, 90, 99–100Jefferson, Thomas, 121Jerome, St.
and Bible, translation of, 29–30biblical chronology of, 37–38and Eusebius’s Chronology, 37–38
and Eusebius’s Chronology,
translation of, 29–30
Jesus Christ, 6, 27–28
birth of, and Eusebius, 28birth of, and Julius’s Chronologia,
35
second coming of, and biblical
chronology , 35–37, 39–40, 41
Jewish Antiquities (Josephus), 32–33
Jewish T almud, 36Josephus, Flavius, 30, 31–32, 39
biblical chronology of, 31–32Jewish Antiquities, 32–33
Julius Africanus, 30, 39
biblical chronology of, 32–37,
32(n3), 41, 42, 43
Chronologia, 33–37Kant, Immanuel, 128Keeper of the Advocates Library , 121Kelvin, Lord. See Thomson, William
Kepler, Johannes, 61
biblical chronology of, 43
King James Bible, 3, 30, 42Kinnordy , 184–185Kirwan, Richard, 160–161, 164–165,
166, 167, 170, 171, 174
T ransactions of the Royal Irish
Academy, 160–161
Knox, John, 58
Lammermuir Hills, 108
Lavoisier, Antoine, 16, 90, 205Lawnmarket, 58Lead decay calculations, 203–204Lehmann, Johann, 149Leibnitz, Gottfried, 61, 99, 101
Protoggea, 99
Lexicon T echnicum, 63
Libya, 33Life of Dr. Hutton (Playfair),
113–114, 205
Limestone, 172–173. See also
Magnesia alba; Subterraneanheat, existence of
Lincoln’s Inn, 182Linnean Society , 182, 197Lithification, 134(n1)Lithosphere plates, 211Lochs Bakie, 184London, 91London Times, 194
Louis XIV , 69, 89Lowlands, 57Luther, Martin, 5–6
biblical chronology of, 40–41, 42, 43Supputatio Annorum Mundi, 41242 I N D E X

Lutheran Church, 14
Lyell, Charles, 11, 179–180, 205, 206,
210
and Darwin, Charles, 6–7,
191–193, 196, 197–198
and earth, age of, calculation of,
200
and Huttonian theory , defense of,
182–189, 190, 192
Principles of Geology, 6–7,
187–188, 191, 196, 199
Macbeth, 48Macdonald clan
and Jacobite Uprising of 1745,
67–82
Maclaurin, Colin, 60–61, 62–63, 65,
74–75, 91, 117, 118, 119,141–142
Sir Isaac Newton’s Philosophical
Discoveries, 61
T reatise of Fluxions, 60–61
Maclaurin, John, 143Magnesia alba, 131–132, 142. See also
Limestone; Subterranean heat,existence of
Maillet, Benoit de, 99, 101
T elliamed, 99
Malcolm III, 48Mantell, Gidean, 182–183, 184, 185Marshak, Stephen
Earth: Portrait of a Planet, 209
Mary II, 57, 68Mathus, Thomas, 195–196
Essay on the Principle of
Population, 195–196
McGowan, Mr., 141Mechanics, science of, mathematical
synthesis of, 61Memoir on the Geology of Central
France (Scrope), 186
Mendel, Gregor, 205Merse, 104Meteorites, and lead decay
calculations, 204
Mineralizing principle, for
sedimentary rock, 133–134,134(n1). See also Sedimentary
rock
Mineralogy of Scotland (Jameson), 166
Mirror Club, 140Moderate Party , 118Monro, Alexander, 87, 132, 142Monthly Review, 161
Moro, Anton-Lazzaro, 96–97
De’ crostacei, 97
Mossner, E. C., 88–89Murray , George, 72–73, 76, 78, 79–80Murray , John, 197Museum of Natural History , 147, 166Muslims, 39
The Natural History of the Mineral
Kingdom (Williams), 160
Natural philosopher, vs. scientist,
14(n1)
Nether Monynut, 108
Newcomen steam engine, 135New Theory of the Earth (Whiston),
98
Newton, Sir Isaac, 4, 14, 16, 60–62,
65, 119, 205
biblical chronology of, 42–43,
97–98
and Boerhaave, Hermann, 87and cycles, notion of, 90–91Opticks, 62
Principia, 61, 206243 INDEX

Newtonian Revolution, 61
New T own, 119–120Nicaea, 26, 26(n1)Nier, Alfred, 203Noah’s Flood, 4, 8, 95, 97–98, 99. See
also Deluge; Universal ocean
theory
Norfolk, 93–94Nor’ Loch, 120North Sea coast, 13–24Numerology , 36
Oldham, William, 96
Old T estament, 30–31, 43
and Julius’s Chronologia, 33–37
See also individual books
Olympiad system, 29“On the Revolutions of the Earth’s
Surface” (Hall), 176
“On the Secular Cooling of the Earth”
(Thomson), 201
Opticks (Newton), 62
Origin of Species (Darwin), 196,
197–198, 200, 206
Otto of Freising, 40An Outline of the Mineralogy of the
Shetland Islands, and of theIsland of Arran (Jameson), 166
Oxford University , 180Oyster Club, 140–141
Palace of Holyroodhouse, 49, 76
Panama, 55–56Panmure House, 138Paris, 174, 183–184Paterson, William, 55–56Patterson, Claire
and earth, age of, calculation of, 204
Pease Bay , 20, 21Pentateuch, 31Philosophical Society , 141–143Pitt, William (the younger), 137Plate tectonics, 8, 211Playfair, James, 177Playfair, John, 10, 11, 64, 88, 93–94,
126, 129, 141, 145, 153,156–157, 160, 161, 164, 176,185
death of, 177and Huttonian theory of earth,
defense of, 167–170, 173
Illustrations of the Huttonian
Theory of the Earth, 168–170,
173, 185, 206
Life of Dr. Hutton, 113–114, 205
and North Sea coast, 15–24
Poker Club, 140Presbyterian Church, 118–119Presbyterian Reformation, 58, 59Preston, battle of, 76–78Prevost, Constant, 183–184Primary micaceous schistus, 19Principia (Newton), 61, 206
Principles of Geology (Lyell), 6–7,
187–188, 191, 196, 199
Pringle, Sir John, 16Printing press
and Luther, Martin, 41
Proceedings of the Royal Society, 159
Protestant Reformation, 40Protoggea (Leibnitz), 99
Ptolemy , 3Ptolemy II, 30–31
Quarterly Review, 186
Radioactive decay calculations,
202–203244 I N D E X

Radioactivity , discovery of, 202
Radium decay calculations, 203Ramsay , Allan, 139Rankenian Club, 140Recalculation
and biblical chronology , 37–38
Reed Point, 20Renton, John, 107Robertson, William, 118, 128, 143, 145
History of Scotland, 128
Robison, John, 134, 143, 145Rock groups
classification scheme for, 148–149See also Granite; Sedimentary rock
Roman Empire, fall of, 38–39Rouelle, Guillaume-François, 90Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 121Royal Irish Academy , 160Royal Medical Society , 165Royal Society , 14, 16, 96, 141–142,
142–143, 145, 201
Physical Class and Literary Class,
146
Russel, Mr., 161Rutherford, Ernst, 202–203Rutherford, John, 88
The Sacred Theory of the Earth
(Burnet), 97–98
Sal ammoniac, production of, from
coal soot, 91–92
Salisbury Crags, 126, 190, 213
Saussure, Horace de, 154Scientist, vs. natural philosopher,
14(n1)
Scotch Board of Customs, 137–138Scotland
and England, union with, 56–57,
65Scots plough, 110Scott, Sir W alter, 128–129Scottish Enlightenment, 9, 11,
127–130
and intellectual exchange,
139–143
participants in, 128–130
Scottish Presbyterian Church, 14Scrope, George, 186
Memoir on the Geology of Central
France, 186
Secondary sandstone strata, 19. See
also Subterranean heat,
existence of
Sedgwick, Adam, 191, 192Sedimentary rock, 8, 96, 113–114,
115–116, 133–134, 134(n1).See also Limestone;
Subterranean heat, existence of
Select Society , 140Septuagint Bible, 42
and Eusebius’s Chronology,
30–31
and Josephus’s Antiquities, 32
and Julius’s Chronologia, 34–35
Siccar Point, 21–22, 158, 164, 170,
179–180, 185, 211–212
Silliman Lectures, 203Silurian graywacke, 19Sir Isaac Newton’s Philosophical
Discoveries (Maclaurin), 61
Slighhouses, 93, 103–116, 124
and cattle and sheep, raising of,
111
farm workers at, 111–112grounds, 107
Smellie, William, 128
The Encyclopedia Britannica (ed.),
128, 167, 176–177245 INDEX

Smith, Adam, 9, 129, 132, 136–139,
140–141, 143, 145, 153, 205,
206
The Theory of Moral Sentiments,
136
Wealth of Nations, 129, 136,
137–138, 206
Social clubs, and intellectual
exchange, 139–143
Society for the Improvement of
Medical Knowledge, 142
Soddy , Frederick, 202–203Sorbonne, 100Spain
and Panama, 55–56
St. Andrews University , 59St. Giles Cathedral, 49St. Jago, 6–7, 191–193St. John’s Hill, 124–125Steam engine, two-cylinder, separate
condenser, 135
Steno, Nicolaus, 95–96, 101, 206–207
Dissertation Concerning a Sold
Body Enclosed By the Process ofNature Within a Solid, 95–96
Stevenson, John, 63Stevenson, Robert Louis, 50–51
Edinburgh, 50–51
Stewart, Archibald, 85–86Stewart, Matthew , 119, 168Stirling Castle, 85Strutt, R. J., 203Stuart, Charles Edward, 65, 67–83,
85, 117
and France, 69–70, 78–79
Subterranean heat, existence of, 8,
18–19, 22, 170–173,210–211. See also Huttonian
theorySuffolk plough, 110Supputatio Annorum Mundi (Luther),
41
Sussex, 182–183, 184Swediaur, Dr., 141Sylvester, Pope, 27(n2)
T elescope, invention of, 61
T elliamed (Maillet), 99
Theophilus of Antioch
biblical chronology of, 32(n3)
The Theory of Moral Sentiments
(Smith), 136
The Theory of the Earth (James
Hutton), 161, 164, 168, 206
Thomas Aquinas, St., 3, 5–6Thomson, William
and earth, age of, calculation of,
200–202
”On the Secular Cooling of the
Earth,” 201
T ransactions of the Royal Irish
Academy (Kirwan), 160–161
T reatise of Fluxions (Maclaurin),
60–61
A T reatise of Human Nature (Hume),
120–121
T uillibardine, Marquis of, 72T weed River, 107
Uniformitarianism, 209–210
Universal gravitation, discovery of,
61–62
Universal ocean theory , 17–18, 99,
100
and W erner, Abraham Gottlob,
17–18, 101(n1), 149, 155,174–175, 181, 184
See also Deluge; Noah’s Flood246 I N D E X

Universe
age of, 2
earth as center of, 2–3See also Biblical chronology;
Earth, age of
University of Edinburgh, 15, 59–63,
189–190
University of Edinburgh medical
school, 74–75, 86–88, 119
University of Glasgow , 119, 201University of Leyden, 87, 90–91University of Paris, 88–90Upper Old Red Sandstone, 19Ussher, James, 36
Annales Veteris T estamenti
(Annals of the Old T estament)(Ussher), 42
biblical chronology of, 42–43
V andals, 38–39, 39V espasian, Emperor, 32Visigoths, 38, 39V olcanoes, 97, 185–186Vulgate, 30
W ales, 135–136
W alker, John, 142, 146–147, 154,
156, 166–167
W allace, Alfred Russel, 7, 196–197, 198W ar of the Austrian Succession, 69W att, James, 9, 129, 132, 134–135,
135, 167
W eald V alley , 200Wealth of Nations (Smith), 129, 136,
137–138, 206
W erner, Abraham Gottlob, 170, 171,
206–207
and earth, theory of, 147–150,
153, 181, 185
and universal ocean theory , 17–18,
101(n1), 149, 155, 174–175,181, 184
See also W ernerian theory
W ernerian theory , 190–191
vs. Huttonian theory , 17–18,
166–167, 173, 183. See alsoHuttonian theory
See also W erner, Abraham Gottlob
Whigs, 56–57, 65, 82–83, 118–119,
127
Whiston, William, 98
New Theory of the Earth, 98
White Adder, 107William III, 57, 68Williams, John, 160
The Natural History of the Mineral
Kingdom, 160
W oodward, John, 98
Essay T oward a Natural History of
the Earth, 98
Y ale University , 203Y oung Pretender. SeeStuart, Charles
Edward
Zoological Society , 194247 INDEX